Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in Another moon. But oh, methinks how slow This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires, Like to a stepdame or a dowager Long withering out a young man’s revenue.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night. Four nights will quickly dream away the time. And then the moon, like to a silver bow New bent in heaven, shall behold the night Of our solemnities.
Go, Philostrate, Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments. Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. Turn melancholy forth to funerals. The pale companion is not for our pomp.
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword And won thy love doing thee injuries. But I will wed thee in another key, With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.
Happy be Theseus, our renownèd duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?
Full of vexation come I with complaint Against my child, my daughter Hermia. Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord, This man hath my consent to marry her. Stand forth, Lysander. And my gracious duke, This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, And interchanged love tokens with my child. Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung With feigning voice verses of feigning love, And stol'n the impression of her fantasy With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats—messengers Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. With cunning hast thou filched my daughter’s heart, Turned her obedience (which is due to me) To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious duke, Be it so she will not here before your grace Consent to marry with Demetrius, I beg the ancient privilege of Athens. As she is mine, I may dispose of her— Which shall be either to this gentleman Or to her death—according to our law Immediately provided in that case.
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid: To you your father should be as a god, One that composed your beauties, yea, and one To whom you are but as a form in wax, By him imprinted and within his power To leave the figure or disfigure it. Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.
In himself he is.But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,The other must be held the worthier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would my father looked but with my eyes.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
I do entreat your grace to pardon me. I know not by what power I am made bold Nor how it may concern my modesty In such a presence here to plead my thoughts, But I beseech your grace that I may know The worst that may befall me in this case, If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to die the death or to abjure Forever the society of men. Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires. Know of your youth. Examine well your blood— Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice, You can endure the livery of a nun, For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, To live a barren sister all your life, Chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon. Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood To undergo such maiden pilgrimage. But earthlier happy is the rose distilled Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, Ere I will yield my virgin patent up Unto his lordship, whose unwishèd yoke My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take time to pause, and by the next new moon— The sealing day betwixt my love and me For everlasting bond of fellowship— Upon that day either prepare to die For disobedience to your father’s will, Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, Or on Diana’s altar to protest For aye austerity and single life.
Relent, sweet Hermia And, Lysander, yieldThy crazèd title to my certain right.
You have her father’s love, Demetrius.Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love, And what is mine my love shall render him. And she is mine, and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius.
[To THESEUS] I am, my lord, as well derived as he, As well possessed. My love is more than his. My fortunes every way as fairly ranked, (If not with vantage) as Demetrius'. And—which is more than all these boasts can be— I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. Why should not I then prosecute my right? Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head, Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena, And won her soul. And she, sweet lady, dotes, Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must confess that I have heard so much And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, But being overfull of self-affairs, My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come. And come, Egeus. You shall go with me. I have some private schooling for you both. For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself To fit your fancies to your father’s will, Or else the law of Athens yields you up (Which by no means we may extenuate) To death, or to a vow of single life. Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love? Demetrius and Egeus, go along. I must employ you in some business Against our nuptial and confer with you Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
With duty and desire we follow you.
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which I could wellBeteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read, Could ever hear by tale or history, The course of true love never did run smooth. But either it was different in blood—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—
O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—
O hell, to choose love by another’s eyes!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, Making it momentary as a sound, Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, Brief as the lightning in the collied night; That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth, And ere a man hath power to say “Behold!” The jaws of darkness do devour it up. So quick bright things come to confusion.
If then true lovers have been ever crossed, It stands as an edict in destiny. Then let us teach our trial patience, Because it is a customary cross, As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.
A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia. I have a widow aunt, a dowager Of great revenue, and she hath no child. From Athens is her house remote seven leagues, And she respects me as her only son. There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee. And to that place the sharp Athenian law Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then, Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night. And in the wood, a league without the town— Where I did meet thee once with Helena To do observance to a morn of May— There will I stay for thee.
My good Lysander! I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow, By his best arrow with the golden head, By the simplicity of Venus' doves, By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen When the false Troyan under sail was seen, By all the vows that ever men have broke (In number more than ever women spoke), In that same place thou hast appointed me, Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Godspeed, fair Helena! Whither away?
Call you me “fair?” That “fair” again unsay. Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair! Your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue’s sweet air More tunable than lark to shepherd’s ear When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. Sickness is catching. Oh, were favor so, Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go. My ear should catch your voice. My eye, your eye. My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody. Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, The rest I’d give to be to you translated. O, teach me how you look and with what art You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
Oh, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, that my prayers could such affection move!
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
None, but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take comfort. He no more shall see my face. Lysander and myself will fly this place. Before the time I did Lysander see Seemed Athens as a paradise to me. Oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell, That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold Her silver visage in the watery glass, Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass (A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.
[To HELENA] And in the wood where often you and I Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet, There my Lysander and myself shall meet. And thence from Athens turn away our eyes To seek new friends and stranger companies. Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us. And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
I will, my Hermia.
How happy some o'er other some can be! Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so. He will not know what all but he do know. And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes, So I, admiring of his qualities. Things base and vile, holding no quantity, Love can transpose to form and dignity. Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste— Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. And therefore is Love said to be a child, Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, So the boy Love is perjured everywhere. For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne, He hailed down oaths that he was only mine. And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt, So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt. I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight. Then to the wood will he tomorrow night Pursue her. And for this intelligence If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. But herein mean I to enrich my pain, To have his sight thither and back again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is all our company here?
You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.
Here is the scroll of every man’s name which is thoughtfit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding day at night.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.
Marry, our play i s The most lamentable comedy and mostcruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.
Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver?
Ready. Name what part I am for and proceed.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
What is Pyramus? A lover or a tyrant?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A lover that kills himself, most gallant, for love.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms. I will condole in some measure. To the rest. Yet my chief humor is for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in to make all split. The raging rocks And shivering shocks Shall break the locks Of prison gates. And Phoebus' car Shall shine from far And make and mar The foolish Fates. This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant’s vein. A lover is more condoling.
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender?
Here, Peter Quince.
Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is Thisbe? A wandering knight?
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
Nay, faith, let me not play a woman. I have a beard coming.
That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.
An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too! I’ll speak in a monstrous little voice: “Thisne, Thisne!” “Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear, thy Thisbe dear and lady dear!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no. You must play Pyramus. And Flute, you Thisbe.
Well, proceed.
Robin Starveling, the tailor?
Here, Peter Quince.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother. Tom Snout, the tinker?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, Peter Quince.
You, Pyramus' father. Myself, Thisbe’s father. Snug thejoiner, you, the lion’s part. And I hope here is a playfitted.
Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
Let me play the lion too. I will roar, that I will do any man’s heart good to hear me. I will roar, that I will make the duke say, “Let him roar again. Let him roar again.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek. And thatwere enough to hang us all.
That would hang us, every mother’s son.
I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. I will roaryou an ’twere any nightingale.
You can play no part but Pyramus. For Pyramus is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one shall see in a summer’s day, a most lovely, gentlemanlike man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, what you will.
I will discharge it in either your straw-color beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your French crown-color beard, your perfect yellow.
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced. But masters, here are yourparts. And I am to entreat you, request you, and desireyou to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants. I pray you, fail me not.
We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be perfect. Adieu.
At the duke’s oak we meet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, spirit? Whither wander you?
Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire. I do wander everywhere Swifter than the moon’s sphere. And I serve the fairy queen To dew her orbs upon the green. The cowslips tall her pensioners be: In their gold coats spots you see. Those be rubies, fairy favors. In those freckles live their savors. I must go seek some dewdrops here And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear. Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I’ll be gone. Our queen and all our elves come here anon.
The king doth keep his revels here tonight. Take heed the queen come not within his sight. For Oberon is passing fell and wrath Because that she, as her attendant hath A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king. She never had so sweet a changeling. And jealous Oberon would have the child Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild. But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy, Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy. And now they never meet in grove or green, By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen. But they do square, that all their elves for fear Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
Either I mistake your shape and making quite, Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he That frights the maidens of the villagery, Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern And bootless make the breathless housewife churn, And sometime make the drink to bear no barm, Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm? Those that “Hobgoblin” call you, and “sweet Puck,” You do their work, and they shall have good luck. Are not you he?
Thou speak’st aright. I am that merry wanderer of the night. I jest to Oberon and make him smile When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, Neighing in likeness of a filly foal. And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl In very likeness of a roasted crab, And when she drinks, against her lips I bob And on her withered dewlap pour the ale. The wisest aunt telling the saddest tale Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me. Then slip I from her bum, down topples she, And “Tailor!” cries, and falls into a cough, And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear A merrier hour was never wasted there. But, room, fairy! Here comes Oberon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence.I have forsworn his bed and company.
Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?
Then I must be thy lady. But I know When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland, And in the shape of Corin sat all day, Playing on pipes of corn and versing love To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here, Come from the farthest steep of India? But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon, Your buskined mistress and your warrior love, To Theseus must be wedded, and you come To give their bed joy and prosperity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? Glance at my creditwith Hippolyta, Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night From Perigouna, whom he ravishèd? And make him with fair Ægles break his faith, With Ariadne and Antiopa?
These are the forgeries of jealousy. And never, since the middle summer’s spring, Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, By pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook, Or in the beachèd margent of the sea, To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, As in revenge, have sucked up from the sea Contagious fogs, which falling in the land Have every pelting river made so proud That they have overborne their continents. The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain, The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard. The fold stands empty in the drownèd field, And crows are fatted with the murrain flock. The nine-men’s-morris is filled up with mud, And the quaint mazes in the wanton green For lack of tread are undistinguishable. The human mortals want their winter here. No night is now with hymn or carol blessed. Therefore the moon, the governess of floods, Pale in her anger, washes all the air, That rheumatic diseases do abound. And thorough this distemperature we see The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer, The childing autumn, angry winter change Their wonted liveries, and the mazèd world, By their increase, now knows not which is which. And this same progeny of evils comes From our debate, from our dissension. We are their parents and original.
Do you amend it then. It lies in you. Why should Titania cross her Oberon? I do but beg a little changeling boy, To be my henchman.
Set your heart at rest. The Fairyland buys not the child of me. His mother was a votaress of my order, And in the spicèd Indian air by night Full often hath she gossiped by my side, And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands, Marking th' embarkèd traders on the flood, When we have laughed to see the sails conceive And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait Following—her womb then rich with my young squire— Would imitate, and sail upon the land To fetch me trifles and return again As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. But she, being mortal, of that boy did die. And for her sake do I rear up her boy, And for her sake I will not part with him.
How long within this wood intend you stay?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Perchance till after Theseus' wedding day. If you will patiently dance in our round And see our moonlight revels, go with us. If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away!We shall chide downright, if I longer stay.
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove Till I torment thee for this injury. [To ROBIN GOODFELLOW] My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest Since once I sat upon a promontory And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath That the rude sea grew civil at her song And certain stars shot madly from their spheres To hear the seamaid’s music?
I remember.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That very time I saw (but thou couldst not) Flying between the cold moon and the Earth, Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took At a fair vestal thronèd by the west, And loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts. But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft Quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon, And the imperial votaress passèd on, In maiden meditation, fancy-free. Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell. It fell upon a little western flower, Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound. And maidens call it “love-in-idleness.” Fetch me that flower. The herb I showed thee once. The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid Will make or man or woman madly dote Upon the next live creature that it sees. Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
I’ll put a girdle round about the EarthIn forty minutes.
Having once this juice, I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep And drop the liquor of it in her eyes. The next thing then she waking looks upon— Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull, On meddling monkey or on busy ape— She shall pursue it with the soul of love. And ere I take this charm from of her sight— As I can take it with another herb— I’ll make her render up her page to me. But who comes here? I am invisible. And I will overhear their conference.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not. Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? The one I’ll slay, the other slayeth me. Thou told’st me they were stol'n unto this wood. And here am I, and wood within this wood, Because I cannot meet my Hermia. Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant. But yet you draw not iron, for my heart Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw, And I shall have no power to follow you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?Or rather, do I not in plainest truthTell you I do not, nor I cannot, love you?
And even for that do I love you the more. I am your spaniel. And, Demetrius, The more you beat me, I will fawn on you. Use me but as your spaniel—spurn me, strike me, Neglect me, lose me. Only give me leave, Unworthy as I am, to follow you. What worser place can I beg in your love— And yet a place of high respect with me— Than to be usèd as you use your dog?
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit.For I am sick when I do look on thee.
And I am sick when I look not on you.
You do impeach your modesty too much, To leave the city and commit yourself Into the hands of one that loves you not, To trust the opportunity of night And the ill counsel of a desert place With the rich worth of your virginity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your virtue is my privilege. For that It is not night when I do see your face. Therefore I think I am not in the night. Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company, For you in my respect are all the world. Then how can it be said I am alone When all the world is here to look on me?
I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you. Run when you will, the story shall be changed. Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase. The dove pursues the griffin. The mild hind Makes speed to catch the tiger —bootless speed, When cowardice pursues and valor flies.
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go.Or if thou follow me, do not believeBut I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius! Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. We cannot fight for love as men may do. We should be wooed and were not made to woo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, To die uponthe hand I love so well.
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.
Ay, there it is.
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
I pray thee, give it me. [He takes flower from ROBIN] I know a bank where the wild thyme blows, Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine, With sweet musk roses and with eglantine. There sleeps Titania sometime of the night, Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight. And there the snake throws her enameled skin, Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes And make her full of hateful fantasies. [He gives ROBIN some of the flower] Take thou some of it and seek through this grove: A sweet Athenian lady is in love With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes. But do it when the next thing he espies May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man By the Athenian garments he hath on. Effect it with some care, that he may prove More fond on her than she upon her love. And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.
Come now, a roundel and a fairy song. Then for the third part of a minute, hence— Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, Some war with reremice for their leathern wings To make my small elves coats, and some keep back The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep. Then to your offices and let me rest.

[Sing] Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh. So good night, with lullaby.
[Sings] Weaving spiders, come not here. Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence! Beetles black, approach not near. Worm nor snail, do no offense.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Sing] Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh. So good night, with lullaby.
Hence, away! Now all is well. One aloof stand sentinel.
[Squeezing flower juice on TITANIA ’s eyelids] What thou seest when thou dost wake, Do it for thy true love take. Love and languish for his sake. Be it ounce or cat or bear, Pard or boar with bristled hair, In thy eye that shall appear, When thou wakest, it is thy dear. Wake when some vile thing is near.
Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood. And to speak troth, I have forgot our way. We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good. And tarry for the comfort of the day.
Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed,For I upon this bank will rest my head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One turf shall serve as pillow for us both.One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear,Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence. Love takes the meaning in love’s conference. I mean that my heart unto yours is knit So that but one heart we can make of it. Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath— So then two bosoms and a single troth. Then by your side no bed-room me deny. For, lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
Lysander riddles very prettily. Now much beshrew my manners and my pride If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy Lie further off in human modesty. Such separation as may well be said Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. So far be distant. And, good night, sweet friend. Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
Amen, amen to that fair prayer, say I.And then end life when I end loyalty!Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed!
Through the forest have I gone. But Athenian found I none, On whose eyes I might approve This flower’s force in stirring love. [Sees LYSANDER and HERMIA] Night and silence! Who is here? Weeds of Athens he doth wear. This is he, my master said, Despisèd the Athenian maid. And here the maiden, sleeping sound On the dank and dirty ground. Pretty soul! She durst not lie Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. [Squeezes flower juice on LYSANDER’s eyelids] Churl, upon thy eyes I throw All the power this charm doth owe. When thou wakest, let love forbid Sleep his seat on thy eyelid. So awake when I am gone, For I must now to Oberon.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.
Oh, I am out of breath in this fond chase. The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, For she hath blessèd and attractive eyes. How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears. If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers. No, no, I am as ugly as a bear, For beasts that meet me run away for fear. Therefore no marvel though Demetrius Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. What wicked and dissembling glass of mine Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne? [Sees LYSANDER] But who is here? Lysander, on the ground? Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound. Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
[Waking] And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. Transparent Helena! Nature shows art That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. Where is Demetrius? Oh, how fit a word Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
Do not say so, Lysander. Say not so.What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.
Content with Hermia? No. I do repent The tedious minutes I with her have spent. Not Hermia but Helena I love. Who will not change a raven for a dove? The will of man is by his reason swayed, And reason says you are the worthier maid. Things growing are not ripe until their season. So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason. And touching now the point of human skill, Reason becomes the marshal to my will And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook Love’s stories written in love’s richest book.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born? When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? Is ’t not enough, is ’t not enough, young man, That I did never, no, nor never can, Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye, But you must flout my insufficiency? Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, In such disdainful manner me to woo. But fare you well. Perforce I must confess I thought you lord of more true gentleness. Oh, that a lady of one man refused Should of another therefore be abused!
She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there. And never mayst thou come Lysander near! For as a surfeit of the sweetest things The deepest loathing to the stomach brings, Or as the heresies that men do leave Are hated most of those they did deceive, So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, Of all be hated, but the most of me. And, all my powers, address your love and might To honor Helen and to be her knight.
[Waking up] Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here. Lysander, look how I do quake with fear. Methought a serpent eat my heart away, And you sat smiling at his cruel pray. Lysander!—What, removed?—Lysander, lord!— What, out of hearing, gone? No sound, no word?— Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear. Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear. No? Then I well perceive you all not nigh. Either death or you I'll find immediately.
Are we all met?
Pat, pat. And here’s a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peter Quince.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a swordto kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
By 'r lakin, a parlous fear.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not a whit. I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed. And for the more better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.
Well. We will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.
No, make it two more. Let it be written in eight and eight.
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
I fear it, I promise you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves. To bring in—God shield us!—a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful wildfowlthan your lion living. And we ought to look to ’t.
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the lion’s neck. And he himself must speak through, saying thus—or to the same defect—“Ladies,” or “Fair ladies,” “I would wish you” or “I would request you” or “I would entreat you” “not to fear, not to tremble, my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as other men are.” And there indeed let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber. For, youknow, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight.
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac. Find out moonshine, find out moonshine!

Why then, may you leave a casement of the great chamberwindow where we play open, and the moon may shine in atthe casement.
Ay. Or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present,the person of Moonshine. Then, there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber. For Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.
You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast about him to signify wall. And let him hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.
If that may be then all is well. Come, sit down, every mother’s son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin. When you have spoken your speech, enter into thatbrake. And so everyone according to his cue.
[Aside] What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here, So near the cradle of the fairy queen? What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor. An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.
Speak, Pyramus. Thisbe, stand forth.
[As PYRAMUS] Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“Odors,” “odors.”
[As PYRAMUS] —odors savors sweet, So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear. But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile, And by and by I will to thee appear.
[Aside] A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.
Must I speak now?
Ay, marry, must you. For you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][As THISBE] Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue, Of color like the red rose on triumphant brier, Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew, As true as truest horse that yet would never tire. I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb.
“Ninus' tomb,” man. Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues and all. Pyramus, enter. Your cue is past. Itis “never tire.”
Oh. [As Thisbe] As true as truest horse that yet would never tire.
[As PYRAMUS] If I were fair, Thisbe, I were only thine.
Oh, monstrous! Oh, strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters! Fly, masters! Help!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier. Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound, A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire. And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to makeme afeard.
O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?
What do you see? You see an ass head of your own, do you?
Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee. Thou art translated.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up and down here and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid. [Sings] The ouzel cock, so black of hue With orange-tawny bill, The throstlewith his note so true, The wren with little quill—
[Waking] What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?
[Sings] The finch, the sparrow, and the lark, The plainsong cuckoo gray, Whose note full many a man doth mark And dares not answer “Nay”— For indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give a bird the lie, though he cry “cuckoo” never so?
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. Mine ear is much enamored of thy note. So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape. And thy fair virtue’s force perforce doth move me On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.
Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. The more the pity thatsome honest neighbors will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
Not so, neither. But if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
Out of this wood do not desire to go. Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. I am a spirit of no common rate. The summer still doth tend upon my state. And I do love thee. Therefore go with me. I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee. And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, And sing while thou on pressèd flowers dost sleep. And I will purge thy mortal grossness so That thou shalt like an airy spirit go. Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, and Mustardseed!
Ready.
And I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I.
And I.
Where shall we go?
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman. Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes. Feed him with apricoks and dewberries, With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. The honey bags steal from the humble-bees, And for night tapers crop their waxen thighs And light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes To have my love to bed and to arise. And pluck the wings from painted butterflies To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
Hail, mortal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail.
Hail.
Hail.
I cry your worships' mercy, heartily. I beseech your worship’s name.
Cobweb.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good MasterCobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.Your name, honest gentleman?
Peaseblossom.
I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother,and to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech you, sir?
Mustardseed.
Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef hath devoured manya gentleman of your house. I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower. The moon methinks looks with a watery eye. And when she weeps, weeps every little flower, Lamenting some enforcèd chastity. Tie up my love's tongue. Bring him silently.
I wonder if Titania be awaked.Then, what it was that next came in her eye,Which she must dote on in extremity.
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
My mistress with a monster is in love. Near to her close and consecrated bower, While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, A crew of patches, rude mechanicals That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, Were met together to rehearse a play Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, Who Pyramus presented in their sport, Forsook his scene and entered in a brake, When I did him at this advantage take, An ass’s nole I fixèd on his head. Anon his Thisbe must be answerèd, And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy, As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye, Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, Rising and cawing at the gun’s report, Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky, So at his sight away his fellows fly; And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls. He “Murder!” cries and help from Athens calls. Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, Made senseless things begin to do them wrong. For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch, Some sleeves, some hats—from yielders all things catch. I led them on in this distracted fear And left sweet Pyramus translated there. When in that moment so it came to pass, Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.
This falls out better than I could devise.But hast thou yet latched the Athenian’s eyesWith the love juice, as I did bid thee do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I took him sleeping—that is finished too—And the Athenian woman by his side,That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.
[Aside to ROBIN] Stand close. This is the same Athenian.
[Aside to OBERON] This is the woman, but not this the man.
Oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so?Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse. For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse. If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, And kill me too. The sun was not so true unto the day As he to me. Would he have stolen away From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as soon This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon May through the center creep and so displease Her brother’s noontide with th' Antipodes. It cannot be but thou hast murdered him. So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So should the murdered look, and so should I, Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear, As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he?Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou drivest me past the bounds Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him then? Henceforth be never numbered among men! Oh, once tell true, tell true even for my sake— Durst thou have looked upon him being awake, And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch! Could not a worm, an adder, do so much? An adder did it, for with doubler tongue Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.I am not guilty of Lysander’s blood.Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
An if I could, what should I get therefore?
A privilege never to see me more.And from thy hated presence part I so.See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
There is no following her in this fierce vein. Here therefore for a while I will remain. So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe, Which now in some slight measure it will pay, If for his tender here I make some stay. [Lies down and sleeps]
[To ROBIN] What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite, And laid the love juice on some true love’s sight. Of thy misprision must perforce ensue Some true love turned, and not a false turned true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then fate o'errules that, one man holding troth,A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
About the wood go swifter than the wind, And Helena of Athens look thou find— All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer, With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. By some illusion see thou bring her here. I’ll charm his eyes against she do appear.
I go, I go. Look how I go,Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.
[Squeezing flower juice into DEMETRIUS ’s eyes] Flower of this purple dye, Hit with Cupid’s archery, Sink in apple of his eye. When his love he doth espy, Let her shine as gloriously As the Venus of the sky. When thou wakest, if she be by, Beg of her for remedy.
Captain of our fairy band, Helena is here at hand, And the youth, mistook by me, Pleading for a lover’s fee. Shall we their fond pageant see? Lord, what fools these mortals be!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand aside. The noise they makeWill cause Demetrius to awake.
Then will two at once woo one. That must needs be sport alone. And those things do best please me That befall preposterously.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn? Scorn and derision never come in tears. Look, when I vow, I weep. And vows so born, In their nativity all truth appears. How can these things in me seem scorn to you, Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
You do advance your cunning more and more. When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray! These vows are Hermia’s. Will you give her o'er? Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. Your vows to her and me, put in two scales, Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.
I had no judgment when to her I swore.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
[Waking] O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne? Crystal is muddy. Oh, how ripe in show Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! That pure congealèd white, high Taurus' snow, Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow When thou hold’st up thy hand. Oh, let me kiss This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent To set against me for your merriment. If you were civil and knew courtesy, You would not do me thus much injury. Can you not hate me, as I know you do, But you must join in souls to mock me too? If you were men, as men you are in show, You would not use a gentle lady so To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts, When I am sure you hate me with your hearts. You both are rivals, and love Hermia, And now both rivals to mock Helena— A trim exploit, a manly enterprise, To conjure tears up in a poor maid’s eyes With your derision! None of noble sort Would so offend a virgin, and extort A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.
You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so. For you love Hermia. This you know I know. And here, with all good will, with all my heart, In Hermia’s love I yield you up my part. And yours of Helena to me bequeath, Whom I do love and will do till my death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none. If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone. My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, And now to Helen is it home returned, There to remain.
Helen, it is not so.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.Look, where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes, The ear more quick of apprehension makes. Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, It pays the hearing double recompense. Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found. Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide, Fair Helena, who more engilds the night Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. Why seek’st thou me? Could not this make thee know The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy! Now I perceive they have conjoined all three To fashion this false sport, in spite of me. Injurious Hermia! Most ungrateful maid! Have you conspired, have you with these contrived To bait me with this foul derision? Is all the counsel that we two have shared, The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent When we have chid the hasty-footed time For parting us—oh, is it all forgot? All schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence? We, Hermia, like two artificial gods, Have with our needles created both one flower, Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, Both warbling of one song, both in one key, As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds, Had been incorporate. So we grew together, Like to a double cherry—seeming parted But yet an union in partition— Two lovely berries molded on one stem; So, with two seeming bodies but one heart, Two of the first, like coats in heraldry, Due but to one and crownèd with one crest. And will you rent our ancient love asunder To join with men in scorning your poor friend? It is not friendly, ’tis not maidenly. Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it, Though I alone do feel the injury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am amazèd at your passionate words.I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, To follow me and praise my eyes and face? And made your other love, Demetrius— Who even but now did spurn me with his foot— To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare, Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander Deny your love, so rich within his soul, And tender me, forsooth, affection, But by your setting on, by your consent? What though I be not so in grace as you— So hung upon with love, so fortunate— But miserable most, to love unloved? This you should pity rather than despise.
I understand not what you mean by this.
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks, Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up— This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled. If you have any pity, grace, or manners, You would not make me such an argument. But fare ye well. 'Tis partly my own fault, Which death or absence soon shall remedy.
Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse.My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, excellent!
[To LYSANDER] Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat. Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers. Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do. I swear by that which I will lose for thee To prove him false that says I love thee not.
I say I love thee more than he can do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.
Quick, come.
Lysander, whereto tends all this?
[To HERMIA] Away, you Ethiope!
No, no. He’llSeem to break loose. Take on as you would follow,But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To HERMIA] Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let looseOr I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,Sweet love?
Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!Out, loathèd medicine! O hated potion, hence!
Do you not jest?
Yes, sooth, and so do you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
I would I had your bond, for I perceiveA weak bond holds you. I’ll not trust your word.
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate? Hate me? Wherefore? O me! What news, my love? Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander? I am as fair now as I was erewhile. Since night you loved me. Yet since night you left me. Why then, you left me—Oh, the gods forbid!— In earnest, shall I say?
Ay, by my life, And never did desire to see thee more. Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt. Be certain, nothing truer. 'Tis no jest That I do hate thee and love Helena.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O me! [To HELENA] You juggler! You canker-blossom!You thief of love! What, have you come by nightAnd stol'n my love’s heart from him?
Fine, i' faith! Have you no modesty, no maiden shame, No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear Impatient answers from my gentle tongue? Fie, fie! You counterfeit, you puppet, you!
“Puppet”? Why so? Ay, that way goes the game. Now I perceive that she hath made compare Between our statures. She hath urged her height, And with her personage, her tall personage, Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him. And are you grown so high in his esteem Because I am so dwarfish and so low? How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak. How low am I? I am not yet so low But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
[To LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS] I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, Let her not hurt me. I was never cursed. I have no gift at all in shrewishness. I am a right maid for my cowardice. Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, Because she is something lower than myself, That I can match her.
“Lower”? Hark, again!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me. I evermore did love you, Hermia, Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you— Save that, in love unto Demetrius, I told him of your stealth unto this wood. He followed you. For love I followed him. But he hath chid me hence and threatened me To strike me, spurn me—nay, to kill me too. And now, so you will let me quiet go, To Athens will I bear my folly back And follow you no further. Let me go. You see how simple and how fond I am.
Why, get you gone! Who is ’t that hinders you?
A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.
What, with Lysander?
With Demetrius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
Oh, when she’s angry, she is keen and shrewd!She was a vixen when she went to school.And though she be but little, she is fierce.
“Little” again? Nothing but “low” and “little”! Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?Let me come to her.
[To HERMIA] Get you gone, you dwarf,You minimus of hindering knotgrass made,You bead, you acorn!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are too officious In her behalf that scorns your services. Let her alone. Speak not of Helena. Take not her part. For if thou dost intend Never so little show of love to her, Thou shalt aby it.
Now she holds me not.Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right,Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
“Follow”? Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.Nay, go not back.
I will not trust you, I, Nor longer stay in your curst company. Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. My legs are longer though, to run away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am amazed and know not what to say.
[To ROBIN] This is thy negligence. Still thou mistakest,Or else committ’st thy knaveries willfully.
Believe me, King of Shadows, I mistook. Did not you tell me I should know the man By the Athenian garment he had on? And so far blameless proves my enterprise, That I have 'nointed an Athenian’s eyes. And so far am I glad it so did sort, As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight. Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night. The starry welkin cover thou anon With drooping fog as black as Acheron, And lead these testy rivals so astray As one come not within another’s way. Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue, Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong. And sometime rail thou like Demetrius. And from each other look thou lead them thus, Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. [Gives ROBIN another flower] Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye, Whose liquor hath this virtuous property To take from thence all error with his might And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. When they next wake, all this derision Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision. And back to Athens shall the lovers wend, With league whose date till death shall never end. Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, I’ll to my queen and beg her Indian boy. And then I will her charmèd eye release From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste. For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger, At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there, Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all, That in crossways and floods have burial, Already to their wormy beds are gone. For fear lest day should look their shames upon, They willfully themselves exile from light And must for aye consort with black-browed night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But we are spirits of another sort. I with the morning’s love have oft made sport, And like a forester the groves may tread Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams, Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. But notwithstanding, haste. Make no delay. We may effect this business yet ere day.
Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down. I am feared in field and town. Goblin, lead them up and down. Here comes one.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
[As DEMETRIUS] Here, villain. Drawn and ready. Where art thou?
I will be with thee straight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][As DEMETRIUS] Follow me thenTo plainer ground.
Lysander, speak again!Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
[As LYSANDER] Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars, And wilt not come? Come, recreant. Come, thou child! I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled That draws a sword on thee.
Yea, art thou there?
[As LYSANDER] Follow my voice. We’ll try no manhood here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He goes before me and still dares me on. When I come where he calls, then he is gone. The villain is much lighter-heeled than I. I followed fast, but faster he did fly, That fallen am I in dark uneven way, And here will rest me. [Lies down] Come, thou gentle day! For if but once thou show me thy grey light, I’ll find Demetrius and revenge this spite. [Sleeps]
[As LYSANDER] Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why comest thou not?
Abide me, if thou darest! For well I wot Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place, And darest not stand nor look me in the face. Where art thou now?
[As LYSANDER] Come hither. I am here.
Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this dear If ever I thy face by daylight see. Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me To measure out my length on this cold bed. By day’s approach look to be visited. [Lies down and sleeps]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O weary night, O long and tedious night, Abate thy hours. Shine comforts from the east, That I may back to Athens by daylight From these that my poor company detest. And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye, Steal me awhile from mine own company. [Lies down and sleeps]
Yet but three? Come one more. Two of both kinds make up four. Here she comes, cursed and sad. Cupid is a knavish lad Thus to make poor females mad.
Never so weary, never so in woe, Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, I can no further crawl, no further go. My legs can keep no pace with my desires. Here will I rest me till the break of day. Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray! [Lies down and sleeps]
On the ground Sleep sound. I'll apply To your eye. Gentle lover, remedy. [Squeezes flower juice into LYSANDER's eyes] When thou wakest, Thou takest True delight In the sight Of thy former lady's eye. And the country proverb known— That every man should take his own— In your waking shall be shown. Jack shall have Jill. Nought shall go ill. The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
[To BOTTOM] Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, And stick musk roses in thy sleek, smooth head, And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where’s Peaseblossom?
Ready.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?
Ready.
Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons inyour hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle. And, good monsieur, bring me the honeybag. Do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur. And good monsieur, have a care the honey bag break not. I would be loath to have you overflown with ahoney bag, signor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ready.
Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.
What’s your will?
Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber’s, monsieur, for methinks I am marvelous hairy about the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must scratch.
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let’s have the tongs and the bones.
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch your good dryoats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
I have a venturous fairy that shall seekThe squirrel’s hoard and fetch thee new nuts.
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me. I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle Gently entwist. The female ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. Oh, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight? Her dotage now I do begin to pity. For, meeting her of late behind the wood, Seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool, I did upbraid her and fall out with her. For she his hairy temples then had rounded With a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers, And that same dew, which sometime on the buds Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. When I had at my pleasure taunted her And she in mild terms begged my patience, I then did ask of her her changeling child, Which straight she gave me and her fairy sent To bear him to my bower in Fairyland. And now I have the boy, I will undo This hateful imperfection of her eyes. And, gentle Puck, take this transformèd scalp From off the head of this Athenian swain, That, he awaking when the other do, May all to Athens back again repair And think no more of this night’s accidents But as the fierce vexation of a dream. But first I will release the fairy queen. [Squeezing flower juice into TITANIA's eyes] Be as thou wast wont to be. See as thou wast wont to see. Dian’s bud o'er Cupid’s flower Hath such force and blessèd power. Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
[Waking] My Oberon, what visions have I seen!Methought I was enamored of an ass.
There lies your love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How came these things to pass?Oh, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.Titania, music call, and strike more deadThan common sleep of all these five the sense.
Music, ho! Music such as charmeth sleep!
[Taking the ass’ head off BOTTOM] Now when thou wakest, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.
Sound, music! Come, my queen, take hands with me, And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. [Dances with TITANIA] Now thou and I are new in amity, And will tomorrow midnight solemnly Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly, And bless it to all fair prosperity. There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fairy King, attend, and mark.I do hear the morning lark.
Then, my queen, in silence sad, Trip we after the night’s shade. We the globe can compass soon Swifter than the wandering moon.
Come, my lord, and in our flight Tell me how it came this night That I sleeping here was found With these mortals on the ground.
Go, one of you, find out the forester. For now our observation is performed. And since we have the vaward of the day, My love shall hear the music of my hounds. Uncouple in the western valley. Let them go. Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear Such gallant chiding. For, besides the groves, The skies, the fountains, every region near Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind, So flewed, so sanded, and their heads are hung With ears that sweep away the morning dew, Crook-kneed, and dew-lapped like Thessalian bulls, Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells, Each under each. A cry more tunable Was never hollaed to, nor cheered with horn, In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly. Judge when you hear. But, soft! What nymphs are these?
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep. And this, Lysander. This Demetrius is. This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena. I wonder of their being here together.
No doubt they rose up early to observe The rite of May, and hearing our intent Came here in grace our solemnity. But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
It is, my lord.

[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past. Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
Pardon, my lord.
I pray you all, stand up.
[To LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS] I know you two are rival enemies. How comes this gentle concord in the world, That hatred is so far from jealousy To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?
My lord, I shall reply amazèdly, Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear, I cannot truly say how I came here. But as I think—for truly would I speak, And now do I bethink me, so it is— I came with Hermia hither. Our intent Was to be gone from Athens, where we might, Without the peril of the Athenian law—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To THESEUS] Enough, enough, my lord. You have enough! I beg the law, the law, upon his head. They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius, Thereby to have defeated you and me, You of your wife and me of my consent, Of my consent that she should be your wife.
[To THESEUS] My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, Of this their purpose hither to this wood. And I in fury hither followed them, Fair Helena in fancy following me. But, my good lord, I wot not by what power— But by some power it is—my love to Hermia, Melted as the snow, seems to me now As the remembrance of an idle gaud Which in my childhood I did dote upon. And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, The object and the pleasure of mine eye, Is only Helena. To her, my lord, Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia. But like in sickness did I loathe this food. But as in health, come to my natural taste, Now I do wish it, love it, long for it, And will for evermore be true to it.
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met. Of this discourse we more will hear anon. Egeus, I will overbear your will. For in the temple by and by with us These couples shall eternally be knit. And, for the morning now is something worn, Our purposed hunting shall be set aside. Away with us to Athens. Three and three, We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity. Come, Hippolyta.
These things seem small and undistinguishable,Like far-off mountains turnèd into clouds.
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,When everything seems double.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So methinks.And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,Mine own, and not mine own.
Are you sure That we are awake? It seems to me That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think The duke was here, and bid us follow him?
Yea, and my father.
And Hippolyta.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, we are awake. Let’s follow himAnd by the way let us recount our dreams.
[Waking] When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer.My next is "Most fair Pyramus." Heigh-ho! Peter Quince?Flute the bellows-mender? Snout the tinker? Starveling?God's my life, stol'n hence, and left me asleep? I havehad a most rare vision. I have had a dream—past the witof man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. Methought I was—thereis no man can tell what. Methought I was, and methoughtI had—but man is but a patched fool if he will offer tosay what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It shall be called "Bottom's Dream" because it hath no bottom. And I will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke. Peradventure, to make it more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.
Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come home yet?
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.
If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward. Doth it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.
No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.
Yea, and the best person too. And he is a very paramourfor a sweet voice.
You must say “paragon.” A “paramour” is, God bless us, a thing of naught.
Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. He could not have ’scaped sixpence a day. An the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.
Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
Masters, I am to discourse wonders—but ask me not what,for if I tell you I am no true Athenian. I will tell you everything, right as it fell out.
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, good stringsto your beards, new ribbons to your pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man look o'er his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. Inany case, let Thisbe have clean linen. And let not him that plays the lion pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws. And most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath. AndI do not doubt but to hear them say, "It is a sweet comedy." No more words. Away, go away!
'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
More strange than true. I never may believe These antique fables nor these fairy toys. Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend More than cool reason ever comprehends. The lunatic, the lover, and the poet Are of imagination all compact. One sees more devils than vast hell can hold— That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic, Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt. The poet’s eye, in fine frenzy rolling, Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to heaven. And as imagination bodies forth The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing A local habitation and a name. Such tricks hath strong imagination, That if it would but apprehend some joy, It comprehends some bringer of that joy. Or in the night, imagining some fear, How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
But all the story of the night told over, And all their minds transfigured so together, More witnesseth than fancy’s images And grows to something of great constancy, But, howsoever, strange and admirable.
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of loveAccompany your hearts!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]More than to usWait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have To wear away this long age of three hours Between our after-supper and bedtime? Where is our usual manager of mirth? What revels are in hand? Is there no play, To ease the anguish of a torturing hour? Call Philostrate.
Here, mighty Theseus.
Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?What masque, what music? How shall we beguileThe lazy time if not with some delight?
[Giving THESEUS a paper] There is a brief, how many sports are ripe.Make choice of which your highness will see first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] “The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.” We’ll none of that. That have I told my love, In glory of my kinsman Hercules. “The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.” That is an old device, and it was played When I from Thebes came last a conqueror. “The thrice three Muses mourning for the death Of learning, late deceased in beggary.” That is some satire, keen and critical, Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. “A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus And his love Thisbe. Very tragical mirth.” “Merry” and “tragical?” “Tedious” and “brief?” That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. How shall we find the concord of this discord?
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long, Which is as brief as I have known a play. But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, Which makes it tedious. For in all the play There is not one word apt, one player fitted. And tragical, my noble lord, it is. For Pyramus therein doth kill himself. Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, Made mine eyes water—but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here, Which never labored in their minds till now, And now have toiled their unbreathed memories With this same play against your nuptial.
And we will hear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my noble lord. It is not for you. I have heard it over, And it is nothing, nothing in the world— Unless you can find sport in their intents, Extremely stretched and conned with cru 'l pain To do you service.
I will hear that play. For never anything can be amiss When simpleness and duty tender it. Go, bring them in. And take your places, ladies.
I love not to see wretchedness o'er chargedAnd duty in his service perishing.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. Our sport shall be to take what they mistake, And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect Takes it in might, not merit. Where I have come, great clerks have purposèd To greet me with premeditated welcomes, Where I have seen them shiver and look pale, Make periods in the midst of sentences, Throttle their practiced accent in their fears, And in conclusion dumbly have broke off, Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet, Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome, And in the modesty of fearful duty I read as much as from the rattling tongue Of saucy and audacious eloquence. Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity In least speak most, to my capacity.
So please your grace, the Prologue is addressed.
Let him approach.
If we offend, it is with our good will. That you should think we come not to offend, But with good will. To show our simple skill, That is the true beginning of our end. Consider then we come but in despite. We do not come as minding to contest you, Our true intent is. All for your delight We are not here. That you should here repent you, The actors are at hand, and by their show You shall know all that you are like to know.
This fellow doth not stand upon points.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt. He knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough tospeak, but to speak true.
Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on arecorder—a sound, but not in government.
His speech was like a tangled chain. Nothing impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show. But wonder on, till truth make all things plain. This man is Pyramus, if you would know. This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain. This man, with lime and roughcast, doth present Wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder. And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are content To whisper. At the which let no man wonder. This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn, Presenteth Moonshine. For, if you will know, By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn To meet at Ninus' tomb—there, there to woo. This grisly beast, which “Lion” hight by name, The trusty Thisbe, coming first by night, Did scare away, or rather did affright. And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall, Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall, And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain. Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast. And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade, His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest, Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain At large discourse, while here they do remain.
I wonder if the lion be to speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No wonder, my lord. One lion may when many asses do.
In this same interlude it doth befall That I, one Snout by name, present a wall. And such a wall, as I would have you think, That had in it a crannied hole, or chink, Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe, Did whisper often very secretly. This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show That I am that same wall. The truth is so. And this the cranny is, right and sinister, Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.
Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black! O night, which ever art when day is not! O night, O night! Alack, alack, alack, I fear my Thisbe’s promise is forgot! And thou, O Wall, O sweet, O lovely Wall, That stand’st between her father’s ground and mine. Thou Wall, O Wall, O sweet and lovely Wall, Show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne!
Thanks, courteous Wall. Jove shield thee well for this! But what see I? No Thisbe do I see. O wicked Wall through whom I see no bliss! Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
No, in truth, sir, he should not. “Deceiving me” is Thisbe’s cue. She is to enter now and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.
O Wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, For parting my fair Pyramus and me! My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones, Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I see a voice. Now will I to the chink,To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face. Thisbe?
My love thou art, my love, I think.
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace.And like Limander am I trusty still.
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
Oh, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!
I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.
Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?
Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus have I, Wall, my part dischargèd so.And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.
Now is the moon down between the two neighbors.
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so willful to hear without warning.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse if imagination amend them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves,they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.
You, ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor, May now perchance both quake and tremble here, When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam. For if I should as lion come in strife Into this place, ’twere pity on my life.
A very gentle beast, of a good conscience.
A very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This lion is a very fox for his valor.
True. And a goose for his discretion.
Not so, my lord. For his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He should have worn the horns on his head.
He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be.
This is the greatest error of all the rest. The man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else the “mani' th' moon?”
He dares not come there for the candle. For you see, itis already in snuff.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!
It appears by his small light of discretion, that he isin the wane. But yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.
Proceed, Moon.
All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthornis the moon; I, the man in the moon; this thornbush, mythornbush; and this dog, my dog.
Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all theseare in the moon. But silence! Here comes Thisbe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love?
[Roaring] O!
Well roared, Lion!
Well run, Thisbe!
Well shone, Moon! Truly, the moon shines with a good grace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well moused, Lion!
And then came Pyramus.
And so the lion vanished.
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams. I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright. For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams, I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight. But stay, O spite! But mark, poor knight, What dreadful dole is here! Eyes, do you see? How can it be? O dainty duck! O dear! Thy mantle good, What, stained with blood? Approach, ye Furies fell! O Fates, come, come, Cut thread and thrum. Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!
This passion and the death of a dear friend would go near to make a man look sad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame? Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear, Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. Come, tears, confound! Out, sword, and wound! The pap of Pyramus— Ay, that left pap Where heart doth hop. [Stabs himself] Thus die I, thus, thus, thus. Now am I dead. Now am I fled. My soul is in the sky. Tongue, lose thy light. Moon, take thy flight.
No die, but an ace for him, for he is but one.
Less than an ace, man. For he is dead. He is nothing.
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
She will find him by starlight. Here she comes, and herpassion ends the play.
Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus.I hope she will be brief.
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the better. He for a man, God warrant us, shefor a woman, God bless us.
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And thus she means , videlice t —
Asleep, my love? What, dead, my dove? O Pyramus, arise! Speak, speak. Quite dumb? Dead, dead? A tomb Must cover thy sweet eyes. These lily lips, This cherry nose, These yellow cowslip cheeks Are gone, are gone. Lovers, make moan. His eyes were green as leeks. O Sisters three, Come, come to me With hands as pale as milk. Lay them in gore, Since you have shore With shears his thread of silk. Tongue, not a word. Come, trusty sword. Come, blade, my breast imbrue. [Stabs herself] And, farewell, friends. Thus Thisbe ends. Adieu, adieu, adieu. [She dies]
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
Ay, and Wall too.
[Out of character] No, assure you. The wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it please you to see theepilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No epilogue, I pray you, for your play needs no excuse.Never excuse—for when the players are all dead, there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe’s garter, itwould have been a fine tragedy. And so it is, truly, and very notably discharged. But come, your Bergomask. Let your epilogue alone.
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. Lovers, to bed. 'Tis almost fairy time. I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn As much as we this night have overwatched. This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed. A fortnight hold we this solemnity, In nightly revels and new jollity.
Now the hungry lion roars And the wolf behowls the moon, Whilst the heavy ploughman snores, All with weary task fordone. Now the wasted brands do glow, Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud, Puts the wretch that lies in woe In remembrance of a shroud. Now it is the time of night That the graves all gaping wide, Every one lets forth his sprite, In the churchway paths to glide. And we fairies, that do run By the triple Hecate’s team From the presence of the sun, Following darkness like a dream, Now are frolic. Not a mouse Shall disturb this hallowed house. I am sent with broom before To sweep the dust behind the door.
Through the house give glimmering light, By the dead and drowsy fire. Every elf and fairy sprite Hop as light as bird from brier. And this ditty, after me, Sing and dance it trippingly.
First, rehearse your song by rote, To each word a warbling note. Hand in hand with fairy grace Will we sing and bless this place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Sings] Now until the break of day, Through this house each fairy stray. To the best bride bed will we, Which by us shall blessèd be. And the issue there create Ever shall be fortunate. So shall all the couples three Ever true in loving be. And the blots of Nature’s hand Shall not in their issue stand. Never mole, harelip, nor scar, Nor mark prodigious, such as are Despisèd in nativity, Shall upon their children be. With this field dew consecrate, Every fairy take his gait. And each several chamber bless Through this palace with sweet peace. And the owner of it blessed Ever shall in safety rest. Trip away. Make no stay. Meet me all by break of day.
If we shadows have offended, Think but this, and all is mended— That you have but slumbered here While these visions did appear. And this weak and idle theme, No more yielding but a dream, Gentles, do not reprehend. If you pardon, we will mend. And, as I am an honest Puck, If we have unearnèd luck Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue, We will make amends ere long. Else the Puck a liar call. So good night unto you all. Give me your hands if we be friends, And Robin shall restore amends.
In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.
And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's deathanew: but I must attend his majesty's command, towhom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a father: he that so generally is at all times good must of necessity hold his virtue to you; whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather than lack it where there is such abundance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
He hath abandoned his physicians, madam; under whose practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.
This young gentlewoman had a father, —O, that 'had'! how sad a passage 'tis! —whose skill was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched so far, would have made nature immortal, and death should have play for lack of work. Would, for the king's sake, he were living! I think it would be the death of the king's disease.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it washis great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
A fistula, my lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewomanthe daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my overlooking. I have those hopes of her good that her education promises; her dispositions she inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there commendations go with pity; they are virtues and traitors too; in her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness.
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in. The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena; go to, no more; lest it be rather thought you affect a sorrow than have it.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,excessive grief the enemy to the living.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If the living be enemy to the grief, the excessmakes it soon mortal.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
How understand we that?
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few, Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend Under thy own life's key: be cheque'd for silence, But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will, That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down, Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord; 'Tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord, Advise him.
He cannot want the bestThat shall attend his love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.
[To HELENA] The best wishes that can be forged inyour thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortableto my mother, your mistress, and make much of her.
Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit ofyour father.
O, were that all! I think not on my father; And these great tears grace his remembrance more Than those I shed for him. What was he like? I have forgot him: my imagination Carries no favour in't but Bertram's. I am undone: there is no living, none, If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one That I should love a bright particular star And think to wed it, he is so above me: In his bright radiance and collateral light Must I be comforted, not in his sphere. The ambition in my love thus plagues itself: The hind that would be mated by the lion Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though plague, To see him every hour; to sit and draw His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls, In our heart's table; heart too capable Of every line and trick of his sweet favour: But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?
[Aside] One that goes with him: I love him for his sake; And yet I know him a notorious liar, Think him a great way fool, solely a coward; Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him, That they take place, when virtue's steely bones Look bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full oft we see Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Save you, fair queen!
And you, monarch!
No.
And no.
Are you meditating on virginity?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let meask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity; howmay we barricado it against him?
Keep him out.
But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant,in the defence yet is weak: unfold to us somewarlike resistance.
There is none: man, sitting down before you, willundermine you and blow you up.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers andblowers up! Is there no military policy, howvirgins might blow up men?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves made, you lose your city. It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve virginity. Loss of virginity is rational increase and there was never virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you were made of is metal to make virgins. Virginity by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it is ever lost: 'tis too cold a companion; away with 't!
I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a virgin.
There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity, is to accuse your mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin: virginity murders itself and should be buried in highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites, much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach. Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by't: out with 't! within ten year it will make itself ten, which is a goodly increase; and the principal itself not much the worse: away with 't!
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept, the less worth: off with 't while 'tis vendible; answer the time of request. Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of fashion: richly suited, but unsuitable: just like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not now. Your date is better in your pie and your porridge than in your cheek; and your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our French withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily; marry, 'tis a withered pear; it was formerly better; marry, yet 'tis a withered pear: will you anything withit?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not my virginity yet— There shall your master have a thousand loves, A mother and a mistress and a friend, A phoenix, captain and an enemy, A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign, A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear; His humble ambition, proud humility, His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet, His faith, his sweet disaster ; with a world Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms, That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he— I know not what he shall. God send him well! The court's a learning place, and he is one—
What one, i' faith?
That I wish well. 'Tis pity—
What's pity?
That wishing well had not a body in't, Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born, Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes, Might with effects of them follow our friends, And show what we alone must think, which never Return us thanks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, Iwill think of thee at court.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
Under Mars, I.
I especially think, under Mars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why under Mars?
The wars have so kept you under that you must needsbe born under Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
Why think you so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You go so much backward when you fight.
That's for advantage.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety;but the composition that your valour and fear makesin you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee acutely. I will return perfect courtier; in the which, my instruction shall serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's counsel and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee; else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes thee away: farewell. When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast none, remember thy friends; get thee a good husband, and use him as he uses thee; so, farewell.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie, Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull. What power is it which mounts my love so high, That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye? The mightiest space in fortune nature brings To join like likes and kiss like native things. Impossible be strange attempts to those That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose What hath been cannot be: who ever strove To show her merit, that did miss her love? The king's disease—my project may deceive me, But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears;Have fought with equal fortune and continueA braving war.
So 'tis reported, sir.
Nay, 'tis most credible; we here received it A certainty, vouch'd from our cousin Austria, With caution that the Florentine will move us For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend Prejudicates the business and would seem To have us make denial.
His love and wisdom,Approved so to your majesty, may pleadFor amplest credence.
He hath arm'd our answer, And Florence is denied before he comes: Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see The Tuscan service, freely have they leave To stand on either part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It well may serveA nursery to our gentry, who are sickFor breathing and exploit.
What's he comes here?
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,Young Bertram.
Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face; Frank nature, rather curious than in haste, Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your majesty's.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would I had that corporal soundness now, As when thy father and myself in friendship First tried our soldiership! He did look far Into the service of the time and was Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long; But on us both did haggish age steal on And wore us out of act. It much repairs me To talk of your good father. In his youth He had the wit which I can well observe To-day in our young lords; but they may jest Till their own scorn return to them unnoted Ere they can hide their levity in honour; So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were, His equal had awaked them, and his honour, Clock to itself, knew the true minute when Exception bid him speak, and at this time His tongue obey'd his hand: who were below him He used as creatures of another place And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks, Making them proud of his humility, In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man Might be a copy to these younger times; Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now But goers backward.
His good remembrance, sir, Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb; So in approof lives not his epitaph As in your royal speech.
Would I were with him! He would always say— Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them, To grow there and to bear, —'Let me not live,'— This his good melancholy oft began, On the catastrophe and heel of pastime, When it was out, —'Let me not live,' quoth he, 'After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses All but new things disdain; whose judgments are Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd; I after him do after him wish too, Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home, I quickly were dissolved from my hive, To give some labourers room.
You are loved, sir:They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,Since the physician at your father's died?He was much famed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some six months since, my lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet. Lend me an arm; the rest have worn me out With several applications; nature and sickness Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count; My son's no dearer.
Thank your majesty.
I will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I wish might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours; for then we wound our modesty and make foul the clearness of our deservings, when of ourselves we publish them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah: the complaints I have heard of you I do not all believe: 'tis my slowness that I do not; for I know you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
Well, sir.
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though many of the rich are damned: but, if I may have your ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beg your good will in this case.
In what case?
In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no heritage: and I think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o' my body; for they say barnes are blessings.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven onby the flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is this all your worship's reason?
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons such as theyare.
May the world know them?
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you andall flesh and blood are; and, indeed, I do marrythat I may repent.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am out o' friends, madam; and I hope to havefriends for my wife's sake.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.
You're shallow, madam, in great friends; for the knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of. He that ears my land spares my team and gives me leave to in the crop; if I be his cuckold, he's my drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend. If men could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in marriage; for young Charbon the Puritan and old Poysam the Papist, howsome'er their hearts are severed in religion, their heads are both one; they may jowl horns together, like any deer i' the herd.
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next way: For I the ballad will repeat, Which men full true shall find; Your marriage comes by destiny, Your cuckoo sings by kind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Get you gone, sir; I'll talk with you more anon.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come toyou: of her I am to speak.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her;Helen, I mean.
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she, Why the Grecians sacked Troy? Fond done, done fond, Was this King Priam's joy? With that she sighed as she stood, With that she sighed as she stood, And gave this sentence then; Among nine bad if one be good, Among nine bad if one be good, There's yet one good in ten.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One good woman in ten, madam; which is a purifying o' the song: would God would serve the world so all the year! we'ld find no fault with the tithe-woman, if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a'! An we might have a good woman born but one every blazing star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well : a man may draw his heart out, ere a' pluck one.
You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you.
That man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt done! Though honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.
Well, now.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me; and she herself, without other advantage, may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds: there is more owing her than is paid; and more shall be paid her than she'll demand.
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think she wished me: alone she was, and did communicate to herself her own words to her own ears; she thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any stranger sense. Her matter was, she loved your son: Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put such difference betwixt their two estates; Love no god, that would not extend his might, only where qualities were level; Dian no queen of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surprised, without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward. This she delivered in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in: which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal; sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns you something to know it.
You have discharged this honestly; keep it to yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this before, which hung so tottering in the balance that I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you, leave me: stall this in your bosom; and I thank you for your honest care: I will speak with you further anon.
Even so it was with me when I was young: If ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong; Our blood to us, this to our blood is born; It is the show and seal of nature's truth, Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth: By our remembrances of days foregone, Such were our faults, or then we thought them none. Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.
What is your pleasure, madam?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You know, Helen,I am a mother to you.
Mine honourable mistress.
Nay, a mother: Why not a mother? When I said 'a mother,' Methought you saw a serpent: what's in 'mother,' That you start at it? I say, I am your mother; And put you in the catalogue of those That were enwombed mine: 'tis often seen Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds A native slip to us from foreign seeds: You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan, Yet I express to you a mother's care: God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood To say I am thy mother? What's the matter, That this distemper'd messenger of wet, The many-colour'd Iris, rounds thine eye? Why? that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I say, I am your mother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon, madam; The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother: I am from humble, he from honour'd name; No note upon my parents, his all noble: My master, my dear lord he is; and I His servant live, and will his vassal die: He must not be my brother.
Nor I your mother?
You are my mother, madam; would you were,— So that my lord your son were not my brother,— Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers, I care no more for than I do for heaven, So I were not his sister. Can't no other, But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law: God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again? My fear hath catch'd your fondness: now I see The mystery of your loneliness, and find Your salt tears' head: now to all sense 'tis gross You love my son; invention is ashamed, Against the proclamation of thy passion, To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true; But tell me then, 'tis so; for, look thy cheeks Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors That in their kind they speak it: only sin And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue, That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so? If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew; If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee, As heaven shall work in me for thine avail, Tell me truly.
Good madam, pardon me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you love my son?
Your pardon, noble mistress!
Love you my son?
Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about; my love hath in't a bond, Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose The state of your affection; for your passions Have to the full appeach'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, I confess, Here on my knee, before high heaven and you, That before you, and next unto high heaven, I love your son. My friends were poor, but honest; so's my love: Be not offended; for it hurts not him That he is loved of me: I follow him not By any token of presumptuous suit; Nor would I have him till I do deserve him; Yet never know how that desert should be. I know I love in vain, strive against hope; Yet in this captious and intenible sieve I still pour in the waters of my love And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like, Religious in mine error, I adore The sun, that looks upon his worshipper, But knows of him no more. My dearest madam, Let not your hate encounter with my love For loving where you do: but if yourself, Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth, Did ever in so true a flame of liking Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity To her, whose state is such that cannot choose But lend and give where she is sure to lose; That seeks not to find that her search implies, But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!
Had you not lately an intent,—speak truly,—To go to Paris?
Madam, I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear. You know my father left me some prescriptions Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading And manifest experience had collected For general sovereignty; and that he will'd me In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them, As notes whose faculties inclusive were More than they were in note: amongst the rest, There is a remedy, approved, set down, To cure the desperate languishings whereof The king is render'd lost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was your motiveFor Paris, was it? speak.
My lord your son made me to think of this; Else Paris and the medicine and the king Had from the conversation of my thoughts Haply been absent then.
But think you, Helen, If you should tender your supposed aid, He would receive it? he and his physicians Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him, They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools, Embowell'd of their doctrine, have left off The danger to itself?
There's something in't, More than my father's skill, which was the greatest Of his profession, that his good receipt Shall for my legacy be sanctified By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your honour But give me leave to try success, I'ld venture The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure By such a day and hour.
Dost thou believe't?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam, knowingly.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love, Means and attendants and my loving greetings To those of mine in court: I'll stay at home And pray God's blessing into thy attempt: Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this, What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell: Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all, The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received, And is enough for both.
'Tis our hope, sir,After well enter'd soldiers, to returnAnd find your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart Will not confess he owes the malady That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords; Whether I live or die, be you the sons Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy,— Those bated that inherit but the fall Of the last monarchy,—see that you come Not to woo honour, but to wed it; when The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek, That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them: They say, our French lack language to deny, If they demand: beware of being captives, Before you serve.
Our hearts receive your warnings.
Farewell. Come hither to me.
O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis not his fault, the spark.
O, 'tis brave wars!
Most admirable: I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with'Too young' and 'the next year' and ''tis too early.'
An thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock, Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry, Till honour be bought up and no sword worn But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.
There's honour in the theft.
Commit it, count.
I am your accessary; and so, farewell.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, captain.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword entrenched it: say to him, I live; and observe his reports for me.
We shall, noble captain.
Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay: the king.
[To BERTRAM] Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have restrained yourself within the list of too cold an adieu: be more expressive to them: for they wear themselves in the cap of the time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and move under the influence of the most received star; and though the devil lead the measure, such are to be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
And I will do so.
Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.
[Kneeling] Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll fee thee to stand up.
Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy,And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,And ask'd thee mercy for't.
Good faith, across: but, my good lord 'tis thus;Will you be cured of your infirmity?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, will you eat no grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine That's able to breathe life into a stone, Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary With spritely fire and motion; whose simple touch, Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay, To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand, And write to her a love-line.
What 'her' is this?
Why, Doctor She: my lord, there's one arrived, If you will see her: now, by my faith and honour, If seriously I may convey my thoughts In this my light deliverance, I have spoke With one that, in her sex, her years, profession, Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her For that is her demand, and know her business? That done, laugh well at me.
Now, good Lafeu, Bring in the admiration; that we with thee May spend our wonder too, or take off thine By wondering how thou took'st it.
Nay, I'll fit you,And not be all day neither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
Nay, come your ways.
This haste hath wings indeed.
Nay, come your ways: This is his majesty; say your mind to him: A traitor you do look like; but such traitors His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressid's uncle, That dare leave two together; fare you well.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lord.Gerard de Narbon was my father;In what he did profess, well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him: Knowing him is enough. On's bed of death Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one. Which, as the dearest issue of his practise, And of his old experience the oily darling, He bade me store up, as a triple eye, Safer than mine own two, more dear; I have so; And hearing your high majesty is touch'd With that malignant cause wherein the honour Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power, I come to tender it and my appliance With all bound humbleness.
We thank you, maiden; But may not be so credulous of cure, When our most learned doctors leave us and The congregated college have concluded That labouring art can never ransom nature From her inaidible estate; I say we must not So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope, To prostitute our past-cure malady To empirics, or to dissever so Our great self and our credit, to esteem A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains: I will no more enforce mine office on you. Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts A modest one, to bear me back again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful: Thou thought'st to help me; and such thanks I give As one near death to those that wish him live: But what at full I know, thou know'st no part, I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
What I can do can do no hurt to try, Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy. He that of greatest works is finisher Oft does them by the weakest minister: So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown, When judges have been babes; great floods have flown From simple sources, and great seas have dried When miracles have by the greatest been denied. Oft expectation fails and most oft there Where most it promises, and oft it hits Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.
I must not hear thee; fare thee well, kind maid;Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid:Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd: It is not so with Him that all things knows As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows; But most it is presumption in us when The help of heaven we count the act of men. Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent; Of heaven, not me, make an experiment. I am not an impostor that proclaim Myself against the level of mine aim; But know I think and think I know most sure My art is not past power nor you past cure.
Are thou so confident? within what spaceHopest thou my cure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The great'st grace lending grace Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring, Ere twice in murk and occidental damp Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp, Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass, What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly, Health shall live free and sickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty and confidenceWhat darest thou venture?
Tax of impudence, A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame Traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name Sear'd otherwise; nay, worse—if worse—extended With vilest torture let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak His powerful sound within an organ weak: And what impossibility would slay In common sense, sense saves another way. Thy life is dear; for all that life can rate Worth name of life in thee hath estimate, Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all That happiness and prime can happy call: Thou this to hazard needs must intimate Skill infinite or monstrous desperate. Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try, That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die, And well deserved: not helping, death's my fee; But, if I help, what do you promise me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Make thy demand.
But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand What husband in thy power I will command: Exempted be from me the arrogance To choose from forth the royal blood of France, My low and humble name to propagate With any branch or image of thy state; But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand ; the premises observed, Thy will by my performance shall be served: So make the choice of thy own time, for I, Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely. More should I question thee, and more I must, Though more to know could not be more to trust, From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest. Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height ofyour breeding.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: Iknow my business is but to the court.
To the court! why, what place make you special,when you put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all men.
Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits allquestions.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks,the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawnbuttock, or any buttock.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your French crown for your taffeta punk, as Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for allquestions?
From below your duke to beneath your constable, itwill fit any question.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be an answer of most monstrous size thatmust fit all demands.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that belongs to't. Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall do you no harm to learn.
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool inquestion, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. Ipray you, sir, are you a courtier?
O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off. More,more, a hundred of them.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and 'spare not me?' Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well to a whipping, if you were but bound to't.
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord,sir!' I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
I play the noble housewife with the timeTo entertain't so merrily with a fool.
O Lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.
An end, sir; to your business. Give Helen this, And urge her to a present answer back: Commend me to my kinsmen and my son: This is not much.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not much commendation to them.
Not much employment for you: you understand me?
Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.
Haste you again.
They say miracles are past; and we have our philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar, things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge, when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hathshot out in our latter times.
And so 'tis.
To be relinquish'd of the artists,—
So I say.
Both of Galen and Paracelsus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So I say.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,—
Right; so I say.
That gave him out incurable,—
Why, there 'tis; so say I too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not to be helped,—
Right; as 'twere, a man assured of a—
Uncertain life, and sure death.
Just, you say well; so would I have said.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, youshall read it in—what do you call there?
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
That's it; I would have said the very same.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me,I speak in respect—
Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is thebrief and the tedious of it; and he's of a mostfacinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to be the—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very hand of heaven.
Ay, so I say.
In a most weak—and debile minister, great power, great transcendence: which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than alone the recovery of the king, as to be—generally thankful.
I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.
Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid thebetter, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, he'sable to lead her a coranto.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen?
'Fore God, I think so.
Go, call before me all the lords in court. Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side; And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive The confirmation of my promised gift, Which but attends thy naming.
Fair maid, send forth thine eye : this youthful parcel Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing, O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice I have to use: thy frank election make; Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistressFall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'ld give bay Curtal and his furniture,My mouth no more were broken than these boys',And writ as little beard.
Peruse them well:Not one of those but had a noble father.
Gentlemen,Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest, That I protest I simply am a maid. Please it your majesty, I have done already: The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me, 'We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused, Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever; We'll ne'er come there again.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Make choice; and, see,Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,And to imperial Love, that god most high,Do my sighs stream. Sir, will you hear my suit?
And grant it.
Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-acefor my life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes, Before I speak, too threateningly replies: Love make your fortunes twenty times above Her that so wishes and her humble love!
No better, if you please.
My wish receive,Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,I'd have them whipped; or I would send them to theTurk, to make eunuchs of.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take; I'll never do you wrong for your own sake: Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have her:sure, they are bastards to the English; the Frenchne'er got 'em.
You are too young, too happy, and too good,To make yourself a son out of my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunkwine: but if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youthof fourteen; I have known thee already.
[To BERTRAM] I dare not say I take you; but I giveMe and my service, ever whilst I live,Into your guiding power. This is the man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, young Bertram, take her; she's thy wife.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,In such a business give me leave to useThe help of mine own eyes.
Know'st thou not, Bertram,What she has done for me?
Yes, my good lord;But never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But follows it, my lord, to bring me down Must answer for your raising? I know her well: She had her breeding at my father's charge. A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain Rather corrupt me ever!
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods, Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together, Would quite confound distinction , yet stand off In differences so mighty. If she be All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest, A poor physician's daughter, thou dislikest Of virtue for the name: but do not so: From lowest place when virtuous things proceed, The place is dignified by the doer's deed: Where great additions swell's, and virtue none, It is a dropsied honour. Good alone Is good without a name. Vileness is so: The property by what it is should go, Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair; In these to nature she's immediate heir, And these breed honour: that is honour's scorn, Which challenges itself as honour's born And is not like the sire: honours thrive, When rather from our acts we them derive Than our foregoers: the mere word's a slave Debauched on every tomb, on every grave A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb Of honour'd bones indeed. What should be said? If thou canst like this creature as a maid, I can create the rest: virtue and she Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do't.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad:Let the rest go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My honour's at the stake; which to defeat, I must produce my power. Here, take her hand, Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift; That dost in vile misprision shackle up My love and her desert; that canst not dream, We, poising us in her defective scale, Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know, It is in us to plant thine honour where We please to have it grow. Cheque thy contempt: Obey our will, which travails in thy good: Believe not thy disdain, but presently Do thine own fortunes that obedient right Which both thy duty owes and our power claims; Or I will throw thee from my care for ever Into the staggers and the careless lapse Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice, Without all terms of pity. Speak; thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit My fancy to your eyes: when I consider What great creation and what dole of honour Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now The praised of the king; who, so ennobled, Is as 'twere born so.
Take her by the hand, And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise A counterpoise, if not to thy estate A balance more replete.
I take her hand.
Good fortune and the favour of the king Smile upon this contract; whose ceremony Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief, And be perform'd to-night: the solemn feast Shall more attend upon the coming space, Expecting absent friends. As thou lovest her, Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Advancing] Do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
Your pleasure, sir?
Your lord and master did well to make hisrecantation.
Recantation! My lord! my master!
Ay; is it not a language I speak?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A most harsh one, and not to be understood withoutbloody succeeding. My master!
Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
To any count, to all counts, to what is man.
To what is count's man: count's master is ofanother style.
You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to whichtitle age cannot bring thee.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty wise fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel; it might pass: yet the scarfs and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from believing thee a vessel of too great a burthen. I have now found thee; when I lose thee again, I care not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up; and that thou't scarce worth.
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee,—
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou hasten thy trial; which if—Lord have mercy on thee for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare thee well: thy casement I need not open, for I look through thee. Give me thy hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.
I have not, my lord, deserved it.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it; and I will notbate thee a scruple.
Well, I shall be wiser.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a smack o' the contrary. If ever thou be'st bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poordoing eternal: for doing I am past: as I will bythee, in what motion age will give me leave.
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me; scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient; there is no fettering of authority. I'll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any convenience, an he were double and double a lord. I'll have no more pity of his age than I would of —I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.
Sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's newsfor you: you have a new mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to makesome reservation of your wrongs: he is my goodlord: whom I serve above is my master.
Who? God?
Ay, sir.
The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou garter up thy arms o' this fashion? dost make hose of sleeves? do other servants so? Thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine honour, if I were but two hours younger, I'ld beat thee: methinks, thou art a general offence, and every man should beat thee: I think thou wast created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a pomegranate; you are a vagabond and no true traveller: you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than the commission of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not worth another word, else I'ld call you knave. I leave you.
Good, very good; it is so then: good, very good;let it be concealed awhile.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
What's the matter, sweet-heart?
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,I will not bed her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, what, sweet-heart?
O my Parolles, they have married me!I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more meritsThe tread of a man's foot: to the wars!
There's letters from my mother: what the import is,I know not yet.
Ay, that would be known. To the wars, my boy, to the wars! He wears his honour in a box unseen, That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home, Spending his manly marrow in her arms, Which should sustain the bound and high curvet Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions France is a stable; we that dwell in't jades; Therefore, to the war!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall be so: I'll send her to my house, Acquaint my mother with my hate to her, And wherefore I am fled; write to the king That which I durst not speak; his present gift Shall furnish me to those Italian fields, Where noble fellows strike: war is no strife To the dark house and the detested wife.
Will this capriccio hold in thee? art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.I'll send her straight away: to-morrowI'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard: A young man married is a man that's marr'd: Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go: The king has done you wrong: but, hush, 'tis so.
My mother greets me kindly; is she well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is not well; but yet she has her health: she's very merry; but yet she is not well: but thanks be given, she's very well and wants nothing i', the world; but yet she is not well.
If she be very well, what does she ail, that she'snot very well?
Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
What two things?
One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send herquickly! the other that she's in earth, from whenceGod send her quickly!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bless you, my fortunate lady!
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine owngood fortunes.
You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep themon, have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money,I would she did as you say.
Why, I say nothing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue shakes out his master's undoing: to say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your title; which is within a very little of nothing.
Away! thou'rt a knave.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou'rt aknave; that's, before me thou'rt a knave: this hadbeen truth, sir.
Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you taught to find me? The search, sir, was profitable; and much fool may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of laughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A good knave, i' faith, and well fed. Madam, my lord will go away to-night; A very serious business calls on him. The great prerogative and rite of love, Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge; But puts it off to a compell'd restraint; Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets, Which they distil now in the curbed time, To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy And pleasure drown the brim.
What's his will else?
That you will take your instant leave o' the king And make this haste as your own good proceeding, Strengthen'd with what apology you think May make it probable need.
What more commands he?
That, having this obtain'd, you presentlyAttend his further pleasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In every thing I wait upon his will.
I shall report it so.
I pray you.
Come, sirrah.
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
And by other warranted testimony.
Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great inknowledge and accordingly valiant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have then sinned against his experience and transgressed against his valour; and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my heart to repent. Here he comes: I pray you, make us friends; I will pursue the amity.
[To BERTRAM] These things shall be done, sir.
Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
Sir?
O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, 's a goodworkman, a very good tailor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to PAROLLES] Is she gone to the king?
She is.
Will she away to-night?
As you'll have her.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure, Given order for our horses; and to-night, When I should take possession of the bride, End ere I do begin.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner; but one that lies three thirds and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you, captain.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord'sdispleasure.
You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs and all, like him that leaped into the custard; and out of it you'll run again, rather than suffer question for your residence.
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's prayers. Fare you well, my lord; and believe this of me, there can be no kernel in this light nut; the soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in matter of heavy consequence; I have kept of them tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur: I have spoken better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand; but we must do good against evil.
An idle lord. I swear.
I think so.
Why, do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common speechGives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have, sir, as I was commanded from you, Spoke with the king and have procured his leave For present parting; only he desires Some private speech with you.
I shall obey his will. You must not marvel, Helen, at my course, Which holds not colour with the time, nor does The ministration and required office On my particular. Prepared I was not For such a business; therefore am I found So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you That presently you take our way for home; And rather muse than ask why I entreat you, For my respects are better than they seem And my appointments have in them a need Greater than shows itself at the first view To you that know them not. This to my mother:
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, soI leave you to your wisdom.
Sir, I can nothing say,But that I am your most obedient servant.
Come, come, no more of that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And ever shall With true observance seek to eke out that Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd To equal my great fortune.
Let that go:My haste is very great: farewell; hie home.
Pray, sir, your pardon.
Well, what would you say?
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe, Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is; But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal What law does vouch mine own.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would you have?
Something; and scarce so much: nothing, indeed. I would not tell you what I would, my lord: Faith yes; Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur? Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go thou toward home; where I will never comeWhilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.Away, and for our flight.
Bravely, coragio!
So that from point to point now have you heard The fundamental reasons of this war, Whose great decision hath much blood let forth And more thirsts after.
Holy seems the quarrelUpon your grace's part; black and fearfulOn the opposer.
Therefore we marvel much our cousin FranceWould in so just a business shut his bosomAgainst our borrowing prayers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my lord, The reasons of our state I cannot yield, But like a common and an outward man, That the great figure of a council frames By self-unable motion : therefore dare not Say what I think of it, since I have found Myself in my incertain grounds to fail As often as I guess'd.
Be it his pleasure.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,That surfeit on their ease, will day by dayCome here for physic.
Welcome shall they be; And all the honours that can fly from us Shall on them settle. You know your places well; When better fall, for your avails they fell: To-morrow to the field.
It hath happened all as I would have had it, savethat he comes not along with her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By my troth, I take my young lord to be a verymelancholy man.
By what observance, I pray you?
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court: our old lings and our Isbels o' the country are nothing like your old ling and your Isbels o' the court: the brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What have we here?
E'en that you have there.
[Reads] I have sent you a daughter-in-law: she hath recovered the king, and undone me. I have wedded her, not bedded her; and sworn to make the 'not' eternal. You shall hear I am run away: know it before the report come. If there be breadth enough in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to you. Your unfortunate son, BERTRAM. This is not well, rash and unbridled boy. To fly the favours of so good a king; To pluck his indignation on thy head By the misprising of a maid too virtuous For the contempt of empire.
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between twosoldiers and my young lady!
What is the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, there is some comfort in the news, somecomfort; your son will not be killed so soon as Ithought he would.
Why should he be killed?
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does: the danger is in standing to't; that's the loss of men, though it be the getting of children. Here they come will tell you more: for my part, I only hear your son was run away.
Save you, good madam.
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do not say so.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen, I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief, That the first face of neither, on the start, Can woman me unto't: where is my son, I pray you?
Madam, he's gone to serve the duke of Florence: We met him thitherward; for thence we came, And, after some dispatch in hand at court, Thither we bend again.
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
When thou canst get the ring upon my finger which never shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then call me husband: but in such a 'then' I write a 'never.' This is a dreadful sentence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brought you this letter, gentlemen?
Ay, madam;And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pain.
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer; If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine, Thou robb'st me of a moiety: he was my son; But I do wash his name out of my blood, And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
Ay, madam.
And to be a soldier?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such is his noble purpose; and believe 't,The duke will lay upon him all the honourThat good convenience claims.
Return you thither?
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
[Reads] Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.'Tis bitter.
Find you that there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam.
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply, which hisheart was not consenting to.
Nothing in France, until he have no wife! There's nothing here that is too good for him But only she; and she deserves a lord That twenty such rude boys might tend upon And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?
A servant only, and a gentlemanWhich I have sometime known.
Parolles, was it not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lady, he.
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.My son corrupts a well-derived natureWith his inducement.
Indeed, good lady,The fellow has a deal of that too much,Which holds him much to have.
You're welcome, gentlemen. I will entreat you, when you see my son, To tell him that his sword can never win The honour that he loses: more I'll entreat you Written to bear along.
We serve you, madam,In that and all your worthiest affairs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so, but as we change our courtesies.Will you draw near!
'Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.' Nothing in France, until he has no wife! Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France; Then hast thou all again. Poor lord! is't I That chase thee from thy country and expose Those tender limbs of thine to the event Of the none-sparing war? and is it I That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers, That ride upon the violent speed of fire, Fly with false aim; move the still-peering air, That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord. Whoever shoots at him, I set him there; Whoever charges on his forward breast, I am the caitiff that do hold him to't; And, though I kill him not, I am the cause His death was so effected: better 'twere I met the ravin lion when he roar'd With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere That all the miseries which nature owes Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rousillon, Whence honour but of danger wins a scar, As oft it loses all: I will be gone; My being here it is that holds thee hence: Shall I stay here to do't? no, no, although The air of paradise did fan the house And angels officed all: I will be gone, That pitiful rumour may report my flight, To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day! For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
The general of our horse thou art; and we,Great in our hope, lay our best love and credenceUpon thy promising fortune.
Sir, it is A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake To the extreme edge of hazard.
Then go thou forth;And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,As thy auspicious mistress!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This very day, Great Mars, I put myself into thy file: Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?Might you not know she would do as she has done,By sending me a letter? Read it again.
[Reads] I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone: Ambitious love hath so in me offended, That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon, With sainted vow my faults to have amended. Write, write, that from the bloody course of war My dearest master, your dear son, may hie: Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far His name with zealous fervor sanctify: His taken labours bid him me forgive; I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth From courtly friends, with camping foes to live, Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth: He is too good and fair for death and me: Whom I myself embrace, to set him free.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words! Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much, As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her, I could have well diverted her intents, Which thus she hath prevented.
Pardon me, madam: If I had given you this at over-night, She might have been o'erta'en; and yet she writes, Pursuit would be but vain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What angel shall Bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive, Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo, To this unworthy husband of his wife; Let every word weigh heavy of her worth That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief. Though little he do feel it, set down sharply. Dispatch the most convenient messenger: When haply he shall hear that she is gone, He will return; and hope I may that she, Hearing so much, will speed her foot again, Led hither by pure love. Which of them both Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense To make distinction. Provide this messenger. My heart is heavy and mine age is weak. Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Nay, come; for if they do approach the city, weshall lose all the sight.
They say the French count has done most honourable service.
It is reported that he has taken their greatestcommander; and that with his own hand he slew theduke's brother.
We have lost our labour; they are gone a contraryway: hark! you may know by their trumpets.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with the report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl: the honour of a maid is her name; and no legacy is so rich as honesty.
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicitedby a gentleman his companion.
I know that knave; hang him! one Parolles: a filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl. Beware of them, Diana; their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of lust, are not the things they go under: many a maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example, that so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs that threaten them. I hope I need not to advise you further; but I hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there were no further danger known but the modesty which is so lost.
You shall not need to fear me.
I hope so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie atmy house; thither they send one another: I'llquestion her. God save you, pilgrim! whither are you bound?
To Saint Jaques le Grand.Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
Is this the way?
Ay, marry, is't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark you! they come this way. If you will tarry, holy pilgrim, But till the troops come by, I will conduct you where you shall be lodged; The rather, for I think I know your hostess As ample as myself.
Is it yourself?
If you shall please so, pilgrim.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
You came, I think, from France?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did so.
Here you shall see a countryman of yoursThat has done worthy service.
His name, I pray you.
The Count Rousillon: know you such a one?
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him:His face I know not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whatsome'er he is, He's bravely taken here. He stole from France, As 'tis reported, for the king had married him Against his liking: think you it is so?
Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady.
There is a gentleman that serves the countReports but coarsely of her.
What's his name?
Monsieur Parolles.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, I believe with him, In argument of praise, or to the worth Of the great count himself, she is too mean To have her name repeated: all her deserving Is a reserved honesty, and that I have not heard examined.
Alas, poor lady!'Tis a hard bondage to become the wifeOf a detesting lord.
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do herA shrewd turn, if she pleased.
How do you mean?May be the amorous count solicits herIn the unlawful purpose.
He does indeed; And brokes with all that can in such a suit Corrupt the tender honour of a maid: But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard In honestest defence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gods forbid else!
So, now they come:
That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son;That, Escalus.
Which is the Frenchman?
He; That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow. I would he loved his wife: if he were honester He were much goodlier: is't not a handsome gentleman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I like him well.
'Tis pity he is not honest: yond's that same knaveThat leads him to these places: were I his lady,I would Poison that vile rascal.
Which is he?
That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy?
Perchance he's hurt i' the battle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lose our drum! well.
He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us.
Marry, hang you!
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound, Already at my house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly thank you: Please it this matron and this gentle maid To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking Shall be for me; and, to requite you further, I will bestow some precepts of this virgin Worthy the note.
We'll take your offer kindly.
Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have hisway.
If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me nomore in your respect.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you think I am so far deceived in him?
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, he's a most notable coward, an infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy your lordship's entertainment.
It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far inhis virtue, which he hath not, he might at somegreat and trusty business in a main danger fail you.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum,which you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly surprise him; such I will have, whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries, when we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship present at his examination: if he do not, for the promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my judgment in any thing.
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he says he has a stratagem for't: when your lordship sees the bottom of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. Here he comes.
[Aside to BERTRAM] O, for the love of laughter,hinder not the honour of his design: let him fetchoff his drum in any hand.
How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in yourdisposition.
A pox on't, let it go; 'tis but a drum.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'But a drum'! is't 'but a drum'? A drum so lost!There was excellent command,—to charge in with ourhorse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
That was not to be blamed in the command of the service: it was a disaster of war that Caesar himself could not have prevented, if he had been there to command.
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: somedishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it isnot to be recovered.
It might have been recovered.
It might; but it is not now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is to be recovered: but that the merit of service is seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.'
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you think your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on; I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it. and extend to you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness.
By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.
But you must not now slumber in it.
I'll about it this evening: and I will presently pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear further from me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?
I know not what the success will be, my lord; butthe attempt I vow.
I know thou'rt valiant; and, to the possibility ofthy soldiership, will subscribe for thee. Farewell.
I love not many words.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this business, which he knows is not to be done; damns himself to do and dares better be damned than to do't?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do not know him, my lord, as we do: certain it is that he will steal himself into a man's favour and for a week escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him out, you have him ever after.
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all ofthis that so seriously he does address himself unto?
None in the world; but return with an invention and clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we have almost embossed him; you shall see his fall to-night; for indeed he is not for your lordship's respect.
We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him. He was first smoked by the old lord Lafeu: when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which you shall see this very night.
I must go look my twigs: he shall be caught.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your brother he shall go along with me.
As't please your lordship: I'll leave you.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show youThe lass I spoke of.
But you say she's honest.
That's all the fault: I spoke with her but once And found her wondrous cold; but I sent to her, By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind, Tokens and letters which she did re-send; And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature: Will you go see her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart, my lord.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,I know not how I shall assure you further,But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate be fallen, I was well born, Nothing acquainted with these businesses; And would not put my reputation now In any staining act.
Nor would I wish you. First, give me trust, the count he is my husband, And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken Is so from word to word; and then you cannot, By the good aid that I of you shall borrow, Err in bestowing it.
I should believe you:For you have show'd me that which well approvesYou're great in fortune.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take this purse of gold, And let me buy your friendly help thus far, Which I will over-pay and pay again When I have found it. The count he wooes your daughter, Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty, Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent, As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it. Now his important blood will nought deny That she'll demand: a ring the county wears, That downward hath succeeded in his house From son to son, some four or five descents Since the first father wore it: this ring he holds In most rich choice; yet in his idle fire, To buy his will, it would not seem too dear, Howe'er repented after.
Now I seeThe bottom of your purpose.
You see it lawful, then: it is no more, But that your daughter, ere she seems as won, Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter; In fine, delivers me to fill the time, Herself most chastely absent: after this, To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns To what is passed already.
I have yielded: Instruct my daughter how she shall persever, That time and place with this deceit so lawful May prove coherent. Every night he comes With musics of all sorts and songs composed To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us To chide him from our eaves; for he persists As if his life lay on't.
Why then to-night Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed, Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed And lawful meaning in a lawful act, Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact: But let's about it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner. When you sally upon him, speak what terrible language you will: though you understand it not yourselves, no matter; for we must not seem to understand him, unless some one among us whom we must produce for an interpreter.
Good captain, let me be the interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
No, sir, I warrant you.
But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]E'en such as you speak to me.
He must think us some band of strangers i' the adversary's entertainment. Now he hath a smack of all neighbouring languages; therefore we must every one be a man of his own fancy, not to know what we speak one to another; so we seem to know, is to know straight our purpose: choughs' language, gabble enough, and good enough. As for you, interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch, ho! here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be time enough to go home. What shall I say I have done? It must be a very plausive invention that carries it: they begin to smoke me; and disgraces have of late knocked too often at my door. I find my tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart hath the fear of Mars before it and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my tongue.
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tonguewas guilty of.
What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing I had no such purpose? I must give myself some hurts, and say I got them in exploit: yet slight ones will not carry it; they will say, 'Came you off with so little?' and great ones I dare not give. Wherefore, what's the instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman's mouth and buy myself another of Bajazeth's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it possible he should know what he is, and bethat he is?
I would the cutting of my garments would serve theturn, or the breaking of my Spanish sword.
We cannot afford you so.
Or the baring of my beard; and to say it was instratagem.
'Twould not do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.
Hardly serve.
Though I swore I leaped from the window of the citadel.
How deep?
Thirty fathom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I would swearI recovered it.
You shall hear one anon.
A drum now of the enemy's,—
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cargo, cargo, cargo, villiando par corbo, cargo.
O, ransom, ransom! do not hide mine eyes.
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
I know you are the Muskos' regiment: And I shall lose my life for want of language; If there be here German, or Dane, low Dutch, Italian, or French, let him speak to me; I'll Discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado: I understand thee, and can speakthy tongue. Kerely bonto, sir, betake thee to thyfaith, for seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O!
O, pray, pray, pray! Manka revania dulche.
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
The general is content to spare thee yet; And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on To gather from thee: haply thou mayst inform Something to save thy life.
O, let me live! And all the secrets of our camp I'll show, Their force, their purposes; nay, I'll speak that Which you will wonder at.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But wilt thou faithfully?
If I do not, damn me.
Acordo linta.Come on; thou art granted space.
Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother,We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffledTill we do hear from them.
Captain, I will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A' will betray us all unto ourselves:Inform on that.
So I will, sir.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
No, my good lord, Diana.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Titled goddess; And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul, In your fine frame hath love no quality? If quick fire of youth light not your mind, You are no maiden, but a monument: When you are dead, you should be such a one As you are now, for you are cold and stem; And now you should be as your mother was When your sweet self was got.
She then was honest.
So should you be.
No:My mother did but duty; such, my lord,As you owe to your wife.
No more o' that; I prithee, do not strive against my vows: I was compell'd to her; but I love thee By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever Do thee all rights of service.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, so you serve us Till we serve you; but when you have our roses, You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves And mock us with our bareness.
How have I sworn!
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth, But the plain single vow that is vow'd true. What is not holy, that we swear not by, But take the High'st to witness: then, pray you, tell me, If I should swear by God's great attributes, I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths, When I did love you ill? This has no holding, To swear by him whom I protest to love, That I will work against him: therefore your oaths Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd, At least in my opinion.
Change it, change it; Be not so holy-cruel: love is holy; And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts That you do charge men with. Stand no more off, But give thyself unto my sick desires, Who then recover: say thou art mine, and ever My love as it begins shall so persever.
I see that men make ropes in such a snareThat we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll lend it thee, my dear; but have no powerTo give it from me.
Will you not, my lord?
It is an honour 'longing to our house, Bequeathed down from many ancestors; Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world In me to lose.
Mine honour's such a ring: My chastity's the jewel of our house, Bequeathed down from many ancestors; Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world In me to lose: thus your own proper wisdom Brings in the champion Honour on my part, Against your vain assault.
Here, take my ring:My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,And I'll be bid by thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window: I'll order take my mother shall not hear. Now will I charge you in the band of truth, When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed, Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me: My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them When back again this ring shall be deliver'd: And on your finger in the night I'll put Another ring, that what in time proceeds May token to the future our past deeds. Adieu, till then; then, fail not. You have won A wife of me, though there my hope be done .
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
For which live long to thank both heaven and me! You may so in the end. My mother told me just how he would woo, As if she sat in 's heart; she says all men Have the like oaths : he had sworn to marry me When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid, Marry that will, I live and die a maid: Only in this disguise I think't no sin To cozen him that would unjustly win.
You have not given him his mother's letter?
I have delivered it an hour since: there issomething in't that stings his nature; for on thereading it he changed almost into another man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shakingoff so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.
When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am thegrave of it.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence, of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: he hath given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
Now, God delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,what things are we!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of all treasons, we still see them reveal themselves, till they attain to their abhorred ends, so he that in this action contrives against his own nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows himself.
Is it not meant damnable in us, to be trumpeters ofour unlawful intents? We shall not then have hiscompany to-night?
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
That approaches apace; I would gladly have him see his company anatomized, that he might take a measure of his own judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for hispresence must be the whip of the other.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In the mean time, what hear you of these wars?
I hear there is an overture of peace.
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.
What will Count Rousillon do then? will he travelhigher, or return again into France?
I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogetherof his council.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let it be forbid, sir; so should I be a great dealof his act.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his house: her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques le Grand; which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she accomplished; and, there residing the tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.
How is this justified?
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which makes her story true, even to the point of her death: her death itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by the rector of the place.
Hath the count all this intelligence?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and the particular confirmations, point frompoint, so to the full arming of the verity.
I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in tears! The great dignity that his valour hath here acquired for him shall at home be encountered with a shame as ample.
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together: our virtues would be proud, if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes would despair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! where's your master?
He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he hath taken a solemn leave: his lordship will next morning for France. The duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king.
They shall be no more than needful there, if theywere more than they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.Here's his lordship now.
How now, my lord! is't not after midnight?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have to-night dispatched sixteen businesses, a month's length a-piece, by an abstract of success: I have congeed with the duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourned for her; writ to my lady mother I am returning; entertained my convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many nicer needs; the last was the greatest, but that I have not ended yet.
If the business be of any difficulty, and thismorning your departure hence, it requires haste ofyour lordship.
I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue between the fool and the soldier? Come, bring forth this counterfeit module, he has deceived me, like a double-meaning prophesier.
Bring him forth: has sat i' the stocks all night,poor gallant knave.
No matter: his heels have deserved it, in usurpinghis spurs so long. How does he carry himself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry him. But to answer you as you would be understood; he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk: he hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i' the stocks: and what think you he hath confessed?
Nothing of me, has a'?
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to hisface: if your lordship be in't, as I believe youare, you must have the patience to hear it.
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing ofme: hush, hush!
Hoodman comes! Portotartarosa
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He calls for the tortures: what will you saywithout 'em?
I will confess what I know without constraint: ifye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
Bosko chimurcho.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
You are a merciful general. Our general bids youanswer to what I shall ask you out of a note.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And truly, as I hope to live.
[Reads] 'First demand of him how many horse theduke is strong.' What say you to that?
Five or six thousand; but very weak and unserviceable: the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation and credit and as I hope to live.
Shall I set down your answer so?
Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and which way youwill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
You're deceived, my lord: this is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant militarist,—that was his own phrase,— that had the whole theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practise in the chape of his dagger.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his swordclean. Nor believe he can have every thing in himby wearing his apparel neatly.
Well, that's set down.
Five or six thousand horse, I said,— I will saytrue,—or thereabouts, set down, for I'll speak truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's very near the truth in this.
But I con him no thanks for't, in the nature hedelivers it.
Poor rogues, I pray you, say.
Well, that's set down.
I humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, therogues are marvellous poor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'Demand of him, of what strength they area-foot.' What say you to that?
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio, a hundred and fifty; Sebastian, so many; Corambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowick, and Gratii, two hundred and fifty each; mine own company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two hundred and fifty each: so that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts not to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake snow from off their cassocks, lest they shake themselves to pieces.
What shall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him mycondition, and what credit I have with the duke.
Well, that's set down.[Reads]'You shall demand of him, whether one Captain Dumainbe i' the camp, a Frenchman; what his reputation iswith the duke; what his valour, honesty, andexpertness in wars; or whether he thinks it were notpossible, with well-weighing sums of gold, tocorrupt him to revolt.' What say you to this? whatdo you know of it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you, let me answer to the particular ofthe inter'gatories: demand them singly.
Do you know this Captain Dumain?
I know him: a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the shrieve's fool with child, —a dumb innocent, that could not say him nay.
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though I knowhis brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
Well, is this captain in the duke of Florence's camp?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
Nay look not so upon me; we shall hear of yourlordship anon.
What is his reputation with the duke?
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officerof mine; and writ to me this other day to turn himout o' the band: I think I have his letter in my pocket.
Marry, we'll search.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there,or it is upon a file with the duke's other lettersin my tent.
Here 'tis; here's a paper: shall I read it to you?
I do not know if it be it or no.
Our interpreter does it well.
Excellently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'Dian, the count's a fool, and full of gold,'—
That is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count Rousillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very ruttish: I pray you, sir, put it up again.
Nay, I'll read it first, by your favour.
My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the behalf of the maid; for I knew the young count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity and devours up all the fry it finds.
Damnable both-sides rogue!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it; After he scores, he never pays the score: Half won is match well made; match, and well make it; He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before; And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this, Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss: For count of this, the count's a fool, I know it, Who pays before, but not when he does owe it. Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear, PAROLLES.'
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhymein's forehead.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifoldlinguist and the armipotent soldier.
I could endure any thing before but a cat, and nowhe's a cat to me.
I perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall befain to hang you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My life, sir, in any case: not that I am afraid to die; but that, my offences being many, I would repent out the remainder of nature: let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' the stocks, or any where, so I may live.
We'll see what may be done, so you confess freely; therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you have answered to his reputation with the duke and to his valour: what is his honesty?
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus: he professes not keeping of oaths; in breaking 'em he is stronger than Hercules: he will lie, sir, with such volubility, that you would think truth were a fool: drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk; and in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bed-clothes about him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but little more to say, sir, of his honesty: he has every thing that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should have, he has nothing.
I begin to love him for this.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox uponhim for me, he's more and more a cat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say you to his expertness in war?
Faith, sir, he has led the drum before the English tragedians; to belie him, I will not, and more of his soldiership I know not; except, in that country he had the honour to be the officer at a place there called Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of files: I would do the man what honour I can, but of this I am not certain.
He hath out-villained villany so far, that therarity redeems him.
A pox on him, he's a cat still.
His qualities being at this poor price, I need notto ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut the entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
Why does he ask him of me?
What's he?
E'en a crow o' the same nest; not altogether so great as the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil: he excels his brother for a coward, yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is: in a retreat he outruns any lackey; marry, in coming on he has the cramp.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If your life be saved, will you undertake to betraythe Florentine?
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon.
I'll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.
[Aside] I'll no more drumming; a plague of all drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy the count, have I run into this danger. Yet who would have suspected an ambush where I was taken?
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die: the general says, you that have so traitorously discovered the secrets of your army and made such pestiferous reports of men very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use; therefore you must die. Come, headsman, off with his head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.
So, look about you: know you any here?
Good morrow, noble captain.
God bless you, Captain Parolles.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save you, noble captain.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu?I am for France.
Good captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon? an I were not a very coward, I'ld compel it of you: but fare you well.
You are undone, captain, all but your scarf; thathas a knot on't yet
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you could find out a country where but women were that had received so much shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare ye well, sir; I am for France too: we shall speak of you there.
Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great, 'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more; But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft As captain shall: simply the thing I am Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart, Let him fear this, for it will come to pass that every braggart shall be found an ass. Rust, sword; cool, blushes! and, Parolles, live Safest in shame! being fool'd, by foolery thrive! There's place and means for every man alive. I'll after them.
That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you, One of the greatest in the Christian world Shall be my surety; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful, Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel: Time was, I did him a desired office, Dear almost as his life; which gratitude Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth, And answer, thanks: I duly am inform'd His grace is at Marseilles; to which place We have convenient convoy. You must know I am supposed dead: the army breaking, My husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding, And by the leave of my good lord the king, We'll be before our welcome.
Gentle madam,You never had a servant to whose trustYour business was more welcome.
Nor you, mistress, Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour To recompense your love: doubt not but heaven Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower, As it hath fated her to be my motive And helper to a husband. But, O strange men! That can such sweet use make of what they hate, When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play With what it loathes for that which is away. But more of this hereafter. You, Diana, Under my poor instructions yet must suffer Something in my behalf.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let death and honestyGo with your impositions, I am yoursUpon your will to suffer.
Yet, I pray you: But with the word the time will bring on summer, When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns, And be as sweet as sharp. We must away; Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us: All's well that ends well; still the fine's the crown; Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow there, whose villanous saffron would have made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in his colour: your daughter-in-law had been alive at this hour, and your son here at home, more advanced by the king than by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.
I would I had not known him; it was the death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken of my flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted love.
'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady: we may pick athousand salads ere we light on such another herb.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of thesalad, or rather, the herb of grace.
They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not muchskill in grass.
Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool?
A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your distinction?
I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service.
So you were a knave at his service, indeed.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.
I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At your service.
No, no, no.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve asgreat a prince as you are.
Who's that? a Frenchman?
Faith, sir, a' has an English name; but his fisnomyis more hotter in France than there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What prince is that?
The black prince, sir; alias, the prince ofdarkness; alias, the devil.
Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not thisto suggest thee from thy master thou talkest of;serve him still.
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire; and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But, sure, he is the prince of the world; let his nobility remain in's court. I am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some that humble themselves may; but the many will be too chill and tender, and they'll be for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee; and I tell thee so before, because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways: let my horses be well looked to, without any tricks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall bejades' tricks; which are their own right by the law of nature.
A shrewd knave and an unhappy.
So he is. My lord that's gone made himself much sport out of him : by his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness; and, indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will.
I like him well; 'tis not amiss. And I was about to tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death and that my lord your son was upon his return home, I moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of my daughter; which, in the minority of them both, his majesty, out of a self-gracious remembrance, did first propose: his highness hath promised me to do it: and, to stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son, there is no fitter matter. How does your ladyship like it?
With very much content, my lord; and I wish ithappily effected.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able body as when he numbered thirty: he will be here to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such intelligence hath seldom failed.
It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here to-night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain with me till they meet together.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I mightsafely be admitted.
You need but plead your honourable privilege.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but Ithank my God it holds yet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of velvet on's face: whether there be a scar under't or no, the velvet knows; but 'tis a goodly patch of velvet: his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good liveryof honour; so belike is that.
But it is your carbonadoed face.
Let us go see your son, I pray you: I long to talkwith the young noble soldier.
Faith there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate finehats and most courteous feathers, which bow the headand nod at every man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But this exceeding posting day and night Must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it: But since you have made the days and nights as one, To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs, Be bold you do so grow in my requital As nothing can unroot you. In happy time;
This man may help me to his majesty's ear,If he would spend his power. God save you, sir.
And you.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
I have been sometimes there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen From the report that goes upon your goodness; An therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions, Which lay nice manners by, I put you to The use of your own virtues, for the which I shall continue thankful.
What's your will?
That it will please you To give this poor petition to the king, And aid me with that store of power you have To come into his presence.
The king's not here.
Not here, sir!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not, indeed:He hence removed last night and with more hasteThan is his use.
Lord, how we lose our pains!
All's well that ends well yet,Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon;Whither I am going.
I do beseech you, sir, Since you are like to see the king before me, Commend the paper to his gracious hand, Which I presume shall render you no blame But rather make you thank your pains for it. I will come after you with what good speed Our means will make us means.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This I'll do for you.
And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.Go, go, provide.
Good Monsieur Lavatch, give my Lord Lafeu this letter: I have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when I have held familiarity with fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in fortune's mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.
Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it smell so strongly as thou speakest of: I will henceforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering. Prithee, allow the wind.
Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; I spakebut by a metaphor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop mynose; or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, getthee further.
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune'sclose-stool to give to a nobleman! Look, here hecomes himself.
Here is a purr of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's cat,—but not a musk-cat, —that has fallen into the unclean fishpond of her displeasure, and, as he says, is muddied withal: pray you, sir, use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his distress in my similes of comfort and leave him to your lordship.
My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruellyscratched.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to pare her nails now. Wherein have you played the knave with fortune, that she should scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and would not have knaves thrive long under her? There's a quart d'ecu for you: let the justices make you and fortune friends: I am for other business.
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't;save your word.
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.
You beg more than 'word,' then. Cox my passion!give me your hand. How does your drum?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my good lord, you were the first that found me!
Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace,for you did bring me out.
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at onceboth the office of God and the devil? One bringsthee in grace and the other brings thee out.
The king's coming; I know by his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me; I had talk of you last night: though you are a fool and a knave, you shall eat; go to, follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I praise God for you.
We lost a jewel of her; and our esteem Was made much poorer by it: but your son, As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know Her estimation home.
'Tis past, my liege; And I beseech your majesty to make it Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth; When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force, O'erbears it and burns on.
My honour'd lady, I have forgiven and forgotten all; Though my revenges were high bent upon him, And watch'd the time to shoot.
This I must say, But first I beg my pardon, the young lord Did to his majesty, his mother and his lady Offence of mighty note; but to himself The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife Whose beauty did astonish the survey Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive, Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve Humbly call'd mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Praising what is lost Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither; We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill All repetition: let him not ask our pardon; The nature of his great offence is dead, And deeper than oblivion we do bury The incensing relics of it: let him approach, A stranger, no offender; and inform him So 'tis our will he should.
I shall, my liege.
What says he to your daughter? have you spoke?
All that he is hath reference to your highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent meThat set him high in fame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He looks well on't.
I am not a day of season, For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail In me at once: but to the brightest beams Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth; The time is fair again.
My high-repented blames,Dear sovereign, pardon to me.
All is whole; Not one word more of the consumed time. Let's take the instant by the forward top; For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time Steals ere we can effect them . You remember The daughter of this lord?
Admiringly, my liege, at first I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue Where the impression of mine eye infixing, Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me, Which warp'd the line of every other favour; Scorn'd a fair colour, or express'd it stolen; Extended or contracted all proportions To a most hideous object: thence it came That she whom all men praised and whom myself, Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye The dust that did offend it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well excused: That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away From the great compt: but love that comes too late, Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried, To the great sender turns a sour offence, Crying, 'That's good that's gone.' Our rash faults Make trivial price of serious things we have, Not knowing them until we know their grave: Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust, Destroy our friends and after weep their dust Our own love waking cries to see what's done, While shame full late sleeps out the afternoon. Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her. Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin: The main consents are had; and here we'll stay To see our widower's second marriage-day.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name Must be digested, give a favour from you To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter, That she may quickly come.
By my old beard, And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead, Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this, The last that e'er I took her at court, I saw upon her finger.
Hers it was not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye, While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't. This ring was mine; and, when I gave it Helen, I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood Necessitied to help, that by this token I would relieve her. Had you that craft, to reave her Of what should stead her most?
My gracious sovereign,Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,The ring was never hers.
Son, on my life,I have seen her wear it; and she reckon'd itAt her life's rate.
I am sure I saw her wear it.
You are deceived, my lord; she never saw it: In Florence was it from a casement thrown me, Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name Of her that threw it: noble she was, and thought I stood engaged: but when I had subscribed To mine own fortune and inform'd her fully I could not answer in that course of honour As she had made the overture, she ceased In heavy satisfaction and would never Receive the ring again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Plutus himself, That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine, Hath not in nature's mystery more science Than I have in this ring: 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's, Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know That you are well acquainted with yourself, Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement You got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety That she would never put it from her finger, Unless she gave it to yourself in bed, Where you have never come, or sent it us Upon her great disaster.
She never saw it.
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour; And makest conjectural fears to come into me Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove That thou art so inhuman,—'twill not prove so;— And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly, And she is dead; which nothing, but to close Her eyes myself, could win me to believe, More than to see this ring. Take him away.
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall, Shall tax my fears of little vanity, Having vainly fear'd too little. Away with him! We'll sift this matter further.
If you shall prove This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence, Where yet she never was.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.
Gracious sovereign, Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not: Here's a petition from a Florentine, Who hath for four or five removes come short To tender it herself. I undertook it, Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know Is here attending: her business looks in her With an importing visage; and she told me, In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern Your highness with herself.
[Reads] Upon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won me. Now is the Count Rousillon a widower: his vows are forfeited to me, and my honour's paid to him. He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow him to his country for justice: grant it me, O king! in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a poor maid is undone. DIANA CAPILET.
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll forthis: I'll none of him.
The heavens have thought well on thee Lafeu, To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors: Go speedily and bring again the count. I am afeard the life of Helen, lady, Was foully snatch'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, justice on the doers!
I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you,And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,Yet you desire to marry.
What woman's that?
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine, Derived from the ancient Capilet: My suit, as I do understand, you know, And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honourBoth suffer under this complaint we bring,And both shall cease, without your remedy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, count; do you know these women?
My lord, I neither can nor will denyBut that I know them: do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine, my lord.
If you shall marry, You give away this hand, and that is mine; You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine; You give away myself, which is known mine; For I by vow am so embodied yours, That she which marries you must marry me, Either both or none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your reputation comes too short for my daughter; youare no husband for her.
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature, Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour Than for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friendTill your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honourThan in my thought it lies.
Good my lord,Ask him upon his oath, if he does thinkHe had not my virginity.
What say'st thou to her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She's impudent, my lord,And was a common gamester to the camp.
He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so, He might have bought me at a common price: Do not believe him. O, behold this ring, Whose high respect and rich validity Did lack a parallel; yet for all that He gave it to a commoner o' the camp, If I be one.
He blushes, and 'tis it: Of six preceding ancestors, that gem, Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue, Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife; That ring's a thousand proofs.
Methought you saidYou saw one here in court could witness it.
I did, my lord, but loath am to produceSo bad an instrument: his name's Parolles.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I saw the man to-day, if man he be.
Find him, and bring him hither.
What of him? He's quoted for a most perfidious slave, With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd; Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth. Am I or that or this for what he'll utter, That will speak any thing?
She hath that ring of yours.
I think she has: certain it is I liked her, And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth: She knew her distance and did angle for me, Madding my eagerness with her restraint, As all impediments in fancy's course Are motives of more fancy; and, in fine, Her infinite cunning, with her modern grace, Subdued me to her rate: she got the ring; And I had that which any inferior might At market-price have bought.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must be patient: You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife, May justly diet me. I pray you yet; Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband; Send for your ring, I will return it home, And give me mine again.
I have it not.
What ring was yours, I pray you?
Sir, much likeThe same upon your finger.
Know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And this was it I gave him, being abed.
The story then goes false, you threw it himOut of a casement.
I have spoke the truth.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly, every feather stars you.Is this the man you speak of?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my lord.
Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true, I charge you, Not fearing the displeasure of your master, Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off, By him and by this woman here what know you?
So please your majesty, my master hath been anhonourable gentleman: tricks he hath had in him,which gentlemen have.
Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman?
Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How, I pray you?
He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
How is that?
He loved her, sir, and loved her not.
As thou art a knave, and no knave. What anequivocal companion is this!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.
He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
Do you know he promised me marriage?
Faith, I know more than I'll speak.
But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them, as I said; but more than that, he loved her: for indeed he was mad for her, and talked of Satan and of Limbo and of Furies and I know not what: yet I was in that credit with them at that time that I knew of their going to bed, and of other motions, as promising her marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to speak of; therefore I will not speak what I know.
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they are married: but thou art too fine in thy evidence; therefore stand aside. This ring, you say, was yours?
Ay, my good lord.
Where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who lent it you?
It was not lent me neither.
Where did you find it, then?
I found it not.
If it were yours by none of all these ways,How could you give it him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never gave it him.
This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes offand on at pleasure.
This ring was mine; I gave it his first wife.
It might be yours or hers, for aught I know.
Take her away; I do not like her now; To prison with her: and away with him. Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring, Thou diest within this hour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll never tell you.
Take her away.
I'll put in bail, my liege.
I think thee now some common customer.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty: He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't; I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not. Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life; I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
She does abuse our ears: to prison with her.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir:
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for, And he shall surety me. But for this lord, Who hath abused me, as he knows himself, Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit him: He knows himself my bed he hath defiled; And at that time he got his wife with child: Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick: So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick: And now behold the meaning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there no exorcistBeguiles the truer office of mine eyes?Is't real that I see?
No, my good lord;'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,The name and not the thing.
Both, both. O, pardon!
O my good lord, when I was like this maid, I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring; And, look you, here's your letter; this it says: 'When from my finger you can get this ring And are by me with child,' etc. This is done: Will you be mine, now you are doubly won?
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it appear not plain and prove untrue,Deadly divorce step between me and you!O my dear mother, do I see you living?
Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon:
Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher: so,I thank thee: wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee:Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.
Let us from point to point this story know, To make the even truth in pleasure flow.[To DIANA]If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower;For I can guess that by thy honest aidThou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.Of that and all the progress, more or less,Resolvedly more leisure shall express:All yet seems well; and if it end so meet,The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
The king's a beggar, now the play is done: All is well ended, if this suit be won, That you express content; which we will pay, With strife to please you, day exceeding day: Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts; Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but this dotage of our general’s O’erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes, That o’er the files and musters of the war Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn The office and devotion of their view Upon a tawny front. His captain’s heart, Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper And is become the bellows and the fan To cool a gypsy’s lust.
Look where they come. Take but good note, and you shall see in him The triple pillar of the world transformed Into a strumpet’s fool. Behold and see.
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
There’s beggary in the love that can be reckoned.
I’ll set a bourn how far to be beloved.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
News, my good lord, from Rome.
Grates me, the sum.
Nay, hear them, Antony. Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent His powerful mandate to you, “Do this, or this. Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that. Perform ’t, or else we damn thee.”
How, my love?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Perchance? Nay, and most like. You must not stay here longer. Your dismission Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony. Where’s Fulvia’s process? Caesar’s, I would say—both? Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt’s queen, Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine Is Caesar’s homager. Else so thy cheek pays shame When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch Of the ranged empire fall. Here is my space. Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life Is to do thus, when such a mutual pair And such a twain can do ’t, in which I bind, On pain of punishment, the world to weet We stand up peerless.
Excellent falsehood! Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her? I’ll seem the fool I am not. Antony Will be himself.
But stirred by Cleopatra. Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours, Let’s not confound the time with conference harsh. There’s not a minute of our lives should stretch Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, wrangling Queen! Whom every thing becomes—to chide, to laugh, To weep, whose every passion fully strives To make itself, in thee, fair and admired! No messenger but thine, and all alone Tonight we’ll wander through the streets and note The qualities of people. Come, my Queen, Last night you did desire it.— [To the MESSENGER] Speak not to us.
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?
Sir, sometimes when he is not AntonyHe comes too short of that great propertyWhich still should go with Antony.
I am full sorry That he approves the common liar, who Thus speaks of him at Rome, but I will hope Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almostmost absolute Alexas, where’s the soothsayer that you praised so to th’ Queen? Oh that I knew this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns with garlands!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soothsayer!
Your will?
[To ALEXAS] Is this the man? [To SOOTHSAYER] Is ’t you,sir, that know things?
In nature’s infinite book of secrecyA little I can read.
[To CHARMIAN] Show him your hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To servants within] Bring in the banquet quickly. WineenoughCleopatra’s health to drink.
[giving hand to SOOTHSAYER] Good sir, give me good fortune.
I make not, but foresee.
Pray, then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To the others] He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you are old.
Wrinkles forbid!
Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.
Hush!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You shall be more beloving than beloved.
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow them all. Let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry may do homage. Find me to marry me with Octavius Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, excellent! I love long life better than figs.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortuneThan that which is to approach.
Then belike my children shall have no names. Prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
If every of your wishes had a womb,And fertile every wish, a million.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
[To SOOTHSAYER] Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
We’ll know all our fortunes.
Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight, shall be—drunk to bed.
[giving her hand to the SOOTHSAYER] There’s a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]E’en as the o’erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication,I cannot scratch mine ear.—Prithee, tell her but a workaday fortune.
Your fortunes are alike.
But how, but how? Give me particulars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have said.
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I,where would you choose it?
Not in my husband’s nose.
Our worser thoughts heavens mend. Alexas! [To SOOTHSAYER] Come, his fortune, his fortune! Oh, let himmarry a woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee, and let her die too, and give him a worse, and letworse follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight, good Isis, I beseech thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore, dear Isis, keep decorum, and fortune him accordingly.
Amen.
[To himself] Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they would make themselves whores but they’d do ’t.
Hush! Here comes Antony.
Not he. The Queen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw you my lord?
No, lady.
Was he not here?
No, madam.
He was disposed to mirth, but on the suddenA Roman thought hath struck him.—Enobarbus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam?
Seek him and bring him hither.—Where’s Alexas?
Here at your service. My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him. Go with us.
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Against my brother Lucius?
Ay. But soon that war had end, and the time’s state Made friends of them, joining their force ’gainst Caesar, Whose better issue in the war from Italy Upon the first encounter drave them.
Well, what worst?
The nature of bad news infects the teller.
When it concerns the fool or coward. On. Things that are past are done, with me. ’Tis thus: Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death, I hear him as he flattered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Labienus— This is stiff news—hath with his Parthian force Extended Asia: from Euphrates His conquering banner shook, from Syria To Lydia and to Ionia, Whilst—
“Antony,” thou wouldst say.
O my lord!
Speak to me home. Mince not the general tongue. Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome. Rail thou in Fulvia’s phrase, and taunt my faults With such full license as both truth and malice Have power to utter. Oh, then we bring forth weeds When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us Is as our earing.
Fare thee well awhile.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At your noble pleasure.
From Sicyon, how, the news? Speak there.
The man from Sicyon—
Is there such an one?
He stays upon your will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him appear.
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,Or lose myself in dotage.
What are you?
Fulvia thy wife is dead.
Where died she?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In Sicyon.Her length of sickness, with what else more seriousImporteth thee to know, this bears.
Forbear me.
[To himself] There’s a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it. What our contempts doth often hurl from us We wish it ours again. The present pleasure, By revolution lowering, does become The opposite of itself. She’s good, being gone. The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on. I must from this enchanting Queen break off. Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know My idleness doth hatch. —How now, Enobarbus!
What’s your pleasure, sir?
I must with haste from hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, we kill all our women. We see how mortal an unkindness is to them. If they suffer our departure, death’s the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great cause they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of this, dies instantly. I have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do think there is mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
She is cunning past man’s thought.
Alack, sir, no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure love. We cannot call her winds and waters sighs and tears. They are greater storms and tempests than almanacs can report. This cannot be cunning in her. If it be, she makes a shower of rain as well as Jove.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would I had never seen her!
O sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work which not to have been blessed withal would have discredited your travel.
Fulvia is dead.
Sir?
Fulvia is dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fulvia?
Dead.
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth, comforting therein, that when old robes are worn out, there are members to make new. If there were no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief is crowned with consolation . Your old smock brings forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.
The business she hath broached in the stateCannot endure my absence.
And the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra’s, which wholly depends on your abode.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more light answers. Let our officers Have notice what we purpose. I shall break The cause of our expedience to the Queen And get her leave to part. For not alone The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches, Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too Of many our contriving friends in Rome Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands The empire of the sea. Our slippery people, Whose love is never linked to the deserver Till his deserts are past, begin to throw Pompey the Great and all his dignities Upon his son, who—high in name and power, Higher than both in blood and life—stands up For the main soldier, whose quality, going on, The sides o’ th’ world may danger. Much is breeding Which, like the courser’s hair, hath yet but life, And not a serpent’s poison. Say our pleasure, To such whose place is under us, requires Our quick remove from hence.
I shall do ’t.
Where is he?
I did not see him since.
[To ALEXAS] See where he is, who’s with him, what he does. I did not send you. If you find him sad, Say I am dancing. If in mirth, report That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,You do not hold the method to enforceThe like from him.
What should I do I do not?
In each thing give him way. Cross him in nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool the way to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear.In time we hate that which we often fear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But here comes Antony.
I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose—
Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.It cannot be thus long. The sides of natureWill not sustain it.
Now, my dearest Queen—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, stand farther from me.
What’s the matter?
I know by that same eye there’s some good news. What, says the married woman you may go? Would she had never given you leave to come! Let her not say ’tis I that keep you here. I have no power upon you. Hers you are.
The gods best know—
Oh never was there queenSo mightily betrayed! Yet at the firstI saw the treasons planted.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cleopatra—
Why should I think you can be mine, and true— Though you in swearing shake the thronèd gods— Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness, To be entangled with those mouth-made vows Which break themselves in swearing!
Most sweet Queen—
Nay, pray you, seek no color for your going, But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying, Then was the time for words. No going then! Eternity was in our lips and eyes, Bliss in our brows’ bent, none our parts so poor But was a race of heaven. They are so still, Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world, Art turned the greatest liar.
How now, lady?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst knowThere were a heart in Egypt.
Hear me, Queen: The strong necessity of time commands Our services awhile, but my full heart Remains in use with you. Our Italy Shines o’er with civil swords. Sextus Pompeius Makes his approaches to the port of Rome. Equality of two domestic powers Breed scrupulous faction. The hated, grown to strength, Are newly grown to love. The condemned Pompey, Rich in his father’s honor, creeps apace Into the hearts of such as have not thrived Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten; And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge By any desperate change. My more particular, And that which most with you should safe my going, Is Fulvia’s death.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?
She’s dead, my Queen.
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure readThe garboils she awaked, at the last, best,See when and where she died.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O most false love! Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see, In Fulvia’s death how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know The purposes I bear, which are or cease As you shall give th’ advice. By the fire That quickens Nilus’ slime, I go from hence Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war As thou affects.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come!But let it be. I am quickly ill, and well,So Antony loves.
My precious Queen, forbear,And give true evidence to his love which standsAn honorable trial.
So Fulvia told me. I prithee, turn aside and weep for her. Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene Of excellent dissembling, and let it look Like perfect honor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You’ll heat my blood. No more.
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.
Now, by my sword—
And target. Still he mends. [To CHARMIAN] But this is not the best. Look, prithee,Charmian, How this Herculean Roman does become The carriage of his chafe.
I’ll leave you, lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Courteous lord, one word. Sir, you and I must part, but that’s not it. Sir, you and I have loved, but there’s not it, That you know well. Something it is I would— Oh, my oblivion is a very Antony, And I am all forgotten.
But that your royaltyHolds idleness your subject, I should take youFor idleness itself.
’Tis sweating labor To bear such idleness so near the heart As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me, Since my becomings kill me when they do not Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence. Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly, And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword Sit laurel victory, and smooth success Be strewed before your feet.
Let us go. Come. Our separation so abides and flies That thou, residing here, goes yet with me, And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. Away!
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know, It is not Caesar’s natural vice to hate Our great competitor. From Alexandria This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes The lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall find there A man who is th’ abstract of all faults That all men follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must not think there are Evils enough to darken all his goodness. His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, More fiery by night’s blackness, hereditary Rather than purchased, what he cannot change Than what he chooses.
You are too indulgent. Let’s grant, it is not Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy, To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit And keep the turn of tippling with a slave, To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet With knaves that smell of sweat. Say this becomes him— As his composure must be rare indeed Whom these things cannot blemish—yet must Antony No way excuse his foils when we do bear So great weight in his lightness. If he filled His vacancy with his voluptuousness, Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones Call on him for ’t. But to confound such time That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud As his own state and ours, ’tis to be chid As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge, Pawn their experience to their present pleasure And so rebel to judgment.
Here’s more news.
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour, Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report How ’tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea, And it appears he is beloved of those That only have feared Caesar. To the ports The discontents repair, and men’s reports Give him much wronged.
I should have known no less. It hath been taught us from the primal state That he which is was wished until he were, And the ebbed man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love, Comes deared by being lacked. This common body, Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream, Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide To rot itself with motion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar, I bring thee word Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates, Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads They make in Italy—the borders maritime Lack blood to think on ’t—and flush youth revolt. No vessel can peep forth, but ’tis as soon Taken as seen, for Pompey’s name strikes more Than could his war resisted.
Antony, Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once Wast beaten from Modena, where thou slew’st Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel Did famine follow, whom thou fought’st against, Though daintily brought up, with patience more Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink The stale of horses and the gilded puddle Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign The roughest berry on the rudest hedge. Yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets, The barks of trees thou browsèd. On the Alps It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh, Which some did die to look on. And all this— It wounds thine honor that I speak it now— Was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek So much as lanked not.
’Tis pity of him.
Let his shames quickly Drive him to Rome. ’Tis time we twain Did show ourselves i’ th’ field, and to that end Assemble we immediate council. Pompey Thrives in our idleness.
Tomorrow, Caesar, I shall be furnished to inform you rightly Both what by sea and land I can be able To front this present time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Till which encounterIt is my business too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantimeOf stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,To let me be partaker.
Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.
Charmian!
Madam?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?
That I might sleep out this great gap of timeMy Antony is away.
You think of him too much.
Oh, ’tis treason!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I trust, not so.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
What’s your highness’ pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure In aught an eunuch has. ’Tis well for thee That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Yes, gracious madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed?
Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing But what indeed is honest to be done. Yet have I fierce affections, and think What Venus did with Mars.
O Charmian, Where think’st thou he is now? Stands he or sits he? Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse? O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony! Do bravely, horse, for wott’st thou whom thou mov’st? The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm And burgonet of men. He’s speaking now, Or murmuring “Where’s my serpent of old Nile?” For so he calls me. Now I feed myself With most delicious poison. Think on me, That am with Phoebus’ amorous pinches black And wrinkled deep in time. Broad-fronted Caesar, When thou wast here above the ground, I was A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow. There would he anchor his aspect, and die With looking on his life.
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony! Yet, coming from him, that great med’cine hath With his tinct gilded thee. How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Last thing he did, dear Queen,He kissed—the last of many doubled kisses—This orient pearl.
His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
“Good friend,” quoth he, “Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends This treasure of an oyster, at whose foot, To mend the petty present, I will piece Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East, Say thou, shall call her mistress.” So he nodded, And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed, Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke Was beastly dumbed by him.
What was he, sad or merry?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Like to the time o’ th’ year between the extremesOf hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
O well-divided disposition! Note him, Note him, good Charmian, ’tis the man, but note him. He was not sad, for he would shine on those That make their looks by his. He was not merry, Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay In Egypt with his joy, but between both. O heavenly mingle! Be’st thou sad or merry, The violence of either thee becomes, So does it no man else.—Mett’st thou my posts?
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.Why do you send so thick?
Who’s born that day When I forget to send to Antony Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian. Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian, Ever love Caesar so?
Oh, that brave Caesar!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be choked with such another emphasis!Say, “the brave Antony.”
The valiant Caesar!
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teethIf thou with Caesar paragon againMy man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,I sing but after you.
My salad days, When I was green in judgment, cold in blood, To say as I said then. [To everyone] But, come, away. [To CHARMIAN] Get me ink and paper. He shall have every day a several greeting, Or I’ll unpeople Egypt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If the great gods be just, they shall assistThe deeds of justest men.
Know, worthy Pompey,That what they do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decaysThe thing we sue for.
We, ignorant of ourselves, Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers Deny us for our good, so find we profit By losing of our prayers.
I shall do well. The people love me, and the sea is mine. My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope Says it will come to th’ full. Mark Antony In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both, Of both is flattered, but he neither loves, Nor either cares for him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar and LepidusAre in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? ’Tis false.
From Silvius, sir.
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love, Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip! Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both. Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts, Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks, Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite, That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor Even till a Lethe’d dulness—
How now, Varrius?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is most certain that I shall deliver: Mark Antony is every hour in Rome Expected. Since he went from Egypt ’tis A space for farther travel.
I could have given less matter A better ear.—Menas, I did not think This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm For such a petty war. His soldiership Is twice the other twain. But let us rear The higher our opinion, that our stirring Can from the lap of Egypt’s widow pluck The ne’er lust-wearied Antony.
I cannot hope Caesar and Antony shall well greet together. His wife that’s dead did trespasses to Caesar. His brother warred upon him, although, I think, Not moved by Antony.
I know not, Menas, How lesser enmities may give way to greater. Were ’t not that we stand up against them all, ’Twere pregnant they should square between themselves, For they have entertainèd cause enough To draw their swords. But how the fear of us May cement their divisions and bind up The petty difference, we yet not know. Be ’t as our gods will have ’t. It only stands Our lives upon to use our strongest hands. Come, Menas.
Good Enobarbus, ’tis a worthy deed,And shall become you well, to entreat your captainTo soft and gentle speech.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall entreat him To answer like himself. If Caesar move him, Let Antony look over Caesar’s head And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter, Were I the wearer of Antonio’s beard, I would not shave ’t today.
’Tis not a time for private stomaching.
Every time serves for the matter that is then born in ’t.
But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the small come first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your speech is passion. But pray you stirNo embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.
And yonder, Caesar.
[To VENTIDIUS] If we compose well here, to Parthia.Hark, Ventidius.
[To MECAENAS] I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.
[To CAESAR and ANTONY]Noble friends,That which combined us was most great, and let notA leaner action rend us. What’s amiss,May it be gently heard. When we debateOur trivial difference loud, we do commitMurder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,The rather for I earnestly beseech,Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,Nor curstness grow to th’ matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]’Tis spoken well.Were we before our armies, and to fight,I should do thus.
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then.
I learn, you take things ill which are not so,Or being, concern you not.
I must be laughed at If or for nothing or a little, I Should say myself offended, and with you Chiefly i’ th’ world; more laughed at, that I should Once name you derogately, when to sound your name It not concerned me.
My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was ’t to you?
No more than my residing here at Rome Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there Did practice on my state, your being in Egypt Might be my question.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How intend you, “practiced”?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother Made wars upon me, and their contestation Was theme for you. You were the word of war.
You do mistake your business. My brother never Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it, And have my learning from some true reports That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather Discredit my authority with yours, And make the wars alike against my stomach, Having alike your cause? Of this my letters Before did satisfy you. If you’ll patch a quarrel, As matter whole you have to make it with, It must not be with this.
You praise yourselfBy laying defects of judgment to me, butYou patched up your excuses.
Not so, not so. I know you could not lack, I am certain on ’t, Very necessity of this thought, that I, Your partner in the cause ’gainst which he fought, Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife, I would you had her spirit in such another. The third o’ th’ world is yours, which with a snaffle You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to wars with the women!
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar, Made out of her impatience—which not wanted Shrewdness of policy too— I grieving grant Did you too much disquiet. For that you must But say I could not help it.
I wrote to you When rioting in Alexandria. You Did pocket up my letters and with taunts Did gibe my missive out of audience.
Sir, He fell upon me ere admitted, then. Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want Of what I was i’ th’ morning. But next day I told him of myself, which was as much As to have asked him pardon. Let this fellow Be nothing of our strife. If we contend, Out of our question wipe him.
You have brokenThe article of your oath, which you shall neverHave tongue to charge me with.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soft, Caesar.
No, Lepidus, let him speak. The honor is sacred which he talks on now, Supposing that I lacked it. —But, on, Caesar. The article of my oath?
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,The which you both denied.
Neglected, rather, And then when poisoned hours had bound me up From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may I’ll play the penitent to you, but mine honesty Shall not make poor my greatness nor my power Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia, To have me out of Egypt, made wars here, For which myself, the ignorant motive, do So far ask pardon as befits mine honor To stoop in such a case.
’Tis noble spoken.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it might please you to enforce no further The griefs between ye, to forget them quite Were to remember that the present need Speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken, Maecenas.
Or, if you borrow one another’s love for the instant, you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You wrong this presence. Therefore speak no more.
Go to, then. Your considerate stone.
I do not much dislike the matter, but The manner of his speech, for ’t cannot be We shall remain in friendship, our conditions So diff’ring in their acts. Yet if I knew What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge O’ th’ world I would pursue it.
Give me leave, Caesar.
Speak, Agrippa.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast a sister by the mother’s side,Admired Octavia. Great Mark AntonyIs now a widower.
Say not so, Agrippa.If Cleopatra heard you, your reproofWere well deserved of rashness.
I am not married, Caesar. Let me hearAgrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity, To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts With an unslipping knot, take Antony Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims No worse a husband than the best of men, Whose virtue and whose general graces speak That which none else can utter. By this marriage, All little jealousies, which now seem great, And all great fears, which now import their dangers, Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales, Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both Would each to other and all loves to both Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke, For ’tis a studied, not a present thought, By duty ruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not till he hears how Antony is touchedWith what is spoke already.
What power is in AgrippaIf I would say, “Agrippa, be it so,”To make this good?
The power of Caesar, andHis power unto Octavia.
May I never To this good purpose, that so fairly shows, Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand Further this act of grace, and from this hour The heart of brothers govern in our loves And sway our great designs!
There’s my hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A sister I bequeath you whom no brother Did ever love so dearly. Let her live To join our kingdoms and our hearts, and never Fly off our loves again!
Happily, amen!
I did not think to draw my sword ’gainst Pompey,For he hath laid strange courtesies and greatOf late upon me. I must thank him only,Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls upon ’s.Of us must Pompey presently be sought,Or else he seeks out us.
Where lies he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]About the Mount Misena.
What is his strength by land?
Great and increasing.But by sea he is an absolute master.
So is the fame. Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it. Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we The business we have talked of.
With most gladness,And do invite you to my sister’s view,Whither straight I’ll lead you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.
[To ENOBARBUS] Welcome from Egypt, sir.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honorablefriend, Agrippa.
Good Enobarbus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested.You stayed well by ’t in Egypt.
Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance and made the night light with drinking.
Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast—and but twelve persons there! Is this true?
This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
She’s a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up his heartupon the river of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.
I will tell you. The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne, Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold, Purple the sails, and so perfumèd that The winds were lovesick with them. The oars were silver, Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made The water which they beat to follow faster, As amorous of their strokes. For her own person, It beggared all description: she did lie In her pavilion—cloth-of-gold, of tissue— O’erpicturing that Venus where we see The fancy outwork nature. On each side her Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids, With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool, And what they undid did.
Oh, rare for Antony!
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides, So many mermaids, tended her i’ th’ eyes, And made their bends adornings. At the helm A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands That yarely frame the office. From the barge A strange invisible perfume hits the sense Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast Her people out upon her, and Antony, Enthroned i’ th’ marketplace, did sit alone, Whistling to th’ air, which, but for vacancy, Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too And made a gap in nature.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rare Egyptian!
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her, Invited her to supper. She replied It should be better he became her guest, Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony, Whom ne’er the word of “No” woman heard speak, Being barbered ten times o’er, goes to the feast, And for his ordinary pays his heart For what his eyes eat only.
Royal wench!She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed.He plowed her, and she cropped.
I saw her once Hop forty paces through the public street, And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, That she did make defect perfection, And, breathless, pour breathe forth.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never. He will not. Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale Her infinite variety. Other women cloy The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry Where most she satisfies, for vilest things Become themselves in her, that the holy priests Bless her when she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settleThe heart of Antony, Octavia isA blessèd lottery to him.
Let us go.Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guestWhilst you abide here.
Humbly, sir, I thank you.
[To OCTAVIA] The world and my great office will sometimesDivide me from your bosom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All which timeBefore the gods my knee shall bow my prayersTo them for you.
[To CAESAR] Good night, sir. —My Octavia, Read not my blemishes in the world’s report. I have not kept my square, but that to come Shall all be done by th’ rule. Good night, dear lady. [To CAESAR] Good night, sir.
Good night.
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you can, your reason?
I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue. But yet hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me whose fortunes shall rise higher,Caesar’s or mine?
Caesar’s. Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side. Thy dæmon—that thy spirit which keeps thee—is Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable Where Caesar’s is not. But near him thy angel Becomes afeard, as being o’erpowered. Therefore Make space enough between you.
Speak this no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To none but thee, no more but when to thee. If thou dost play with him at any game, Thou art sure to lose, and of that natural luck He beats thee ’gainst the odds. Thy luster thickens When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit Is all afraid to govern thee near him, But, he away, ’tis noble.
Get thee gone.Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
[To himself] He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap, He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him, And in our sports my better cunning faints Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds. His cocks do win the battle still of mine When it is all to naught, and his quails ever Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt. And though I make this marriage for my peace, I’ th’ East my pleasure lies.
O come, Ventidius.You must to Parthia. Your commission’s ready.Follow me and receive ’t.
Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you, hastenYour generals after.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, Mark AntonyWill e’en but kiss Octavia, and we’ll follow.
Till I shall see you in your soldiers’ dress,Which will become you both, farewell.
We shall,As I conceive the journey, be at the MountBefore you, Lepidus.
Your way is shorter.My purposes do draw me much about.You’ll win two days upon me.
Sir, good success.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell.
Give me some music. Music, moody foodOf us that trade in love.
The music, ho!
Let it alone. Let’s to billiards. Come, Charmian.
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As well a woman with an eunuch playedAs with a woman.—Come, you’ll play with me, sir?
As well as I can, madam.
And when good will is showed, though ’t come too short, The actor may plead pardon. I’ll none now. Give me mine angle. We’ll to th’ river. There, My music playing far off, I will betray Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up I’ll think them every one an Antony And say, “Aha! You’re caught.”
’Twas merry when You wagered on your angling, when your diver Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he With fervency drew up.
That time—Oh, times!— I laughed him out of patience, and that night I laughed him into patience. And next morn, Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed, Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst I wore his sword Philippan.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, from Italy!Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,That long time have been barren.
Madam, madam—
Antonio’s dead! If thou say so, villain, Thou kill’st thy mistress. But well and free, If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here My bluest veins to kiss —a hand that kings Have lipped, and trembled kissing.
First, madam, he is well.
Why, there’s more gold. But, sirrah, mark, we use To say the dead are well. Bring it to that, The gold I give thee will I melt and pour Down thy ill-uttering throat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good madam, hear me.
Well, go to, I will. But there’s no goodness in thy face—if Antony Be free and healthful, so tart a favor To trumpet such good tidings! If not well, Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes, Not like a formal man.
Will ’t please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak’st. Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well, Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him, I’ll set thee in a shower of gold and hail Rich pearls upon thee.
Madam, he’s well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well said.
And friends with Caesar.
Th’ art an honest man.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But yet, madam—
I do not like “But yet.” It does allay The good precedence. Fie upon “But yet.” “But yet” is as a jailer to bring forth Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend, Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear, The good and bad together. He’s friends with Caesar, In state of health, thou say’st, and, thou say’st, free.
Free, madam, no. I made no such report.He’s bound unto Octavia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn i’ th’ bed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am pale, Charmian.
Madam, he’s married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
Good madam, patience.
What say you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hence, horrible villain, or I’ll spurn thine eyesLike balls before me! I’ll unhair thy head!
Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine,Smarting in ling’ring pickle!
Gracious madam,I that do bring the news made not the match.
Say ’tis not so, a province I will give thee And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage, And I will boot thee with what gift beside Thy modesty can beg.
He’s married, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Nay then, I’ll run.What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself.The man is innocent.
Some innocents ’scape not the thunderbolt. Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures Turn all to serpents. Call the slave again. Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!
He is afeard to come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will not hurt him. These hands do lack nobility that they strike A meaner than myself, since I myself Have given myself the cause.
Come hither, sir. Though it be honest, it is never good To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell Themselves when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?I cannot hate thee worser than I doIf thou again say “yes.”
He’s married, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
Oh, I would thou didst, So half my Egypt were submerged and made A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence. Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
I crave your highness’ pardon.
He is married?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take no offense that I would not offend you.To punish me for what you make me doSeems much unequal. He’s married to Octavia.
Oh, that his fault should make a knave of thee, That art not what th’ art sure of! Get thee hence. The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand And be undone by ’em!
Good your highness, patience.
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Many times, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am paid for ’t now. Lead me from hence. I faint. O Iras, Charmian! ’Tis no matter.— Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him Report the feature of Octavia: her years, Her inclination. Let him not leave out The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
Let him for ever go:—let him not—Charmian, Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon, The other way's a Mars. Bid you Alexas To MARDIAN Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian, But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
Your hostages I have, so have you mine,And we shall talk before we fight.
Most meet That first we come to words, and therefore have we Our written purposes before us sent, Which, if thou hast considered, let us know If ’twill tie up thy discontented sword And carry back to Sicily much tall youth That else must perish here.
To you all three, The senators alone of this great world, Chief factors for the gods: I do not know Wherefore my father should revengers want, Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar, Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted, There saw you laboring for him. What was ’t That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what Made the all-honored, honest Roman Brutus, With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom, To drench the Capitol, but that they would Have one man but a man? And that is it Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden The angered ocean foams, with which I meant To scourge th’ ingratitude that despiteful Rome Cast on my noble father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take your time.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.We’ll speak with thee at sea. At land, thou know’stHow much we do o’ercount thee.
At land indeed Thou dost o’ercount me of my father’s house, But since the cuckoo builds not for himself, Remain in ’t as thou mayst.
Be pleased to tell us—For this is from the present—how you takeThe offers we have sent you.
There’s the point.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which do not be entreated to, but weighWhat it is worth embraced.
And what may follow,To try a larger fortune.
You have made me offer Of Sicily, Sardinia. And I must Rid all the sea of pirates, then, to send Measures of wheat to Rome. This ’greed upon To part with unhacked edges and bear back Our targes undinted.
That’s our offer.
Know then I came before you here a man prepared To take this offer, but Mark Antony Put me to some impatience. [To ANTONY] —Though I lose The praise of it by telling, you must know, When Caesar and your brother were at blows, Your mother came to Sicily and did find Her welcome friendly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To POMPEY] I have heard it, Pompey,And am well studied for a liberal thanksWhich I do owe you.
Let me have your hand.
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
The beds i’ th’ East are soft, and thanks to you,That called me timelier than my purpose hither,For I have gained by ’t.
[To POMPEY] Since I saw you lastThere’s a change upon you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I know not What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face, But in my bosom shall she never come To make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.I crave our composition may be writtenAnd sealed between us.
That’s the next to do.
We’ll feast each other ere we part, and let’sDraw lots who shall begin.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That will I, Pompey.
No, Antony, take the lot. But, first or last, Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have The fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar Grew fat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meanings, sir.
And fair words to them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then so much have I heard.And I have heard Apollodorus carried—
[interrupting POMPEY] No more of that. He did so.
What, I pray you?
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
I know thee now. How far’st thou, soldier?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well,And well am like to do, for I perceive,Four feasts are toward.
Let me shake thy hand.I never hated thee. I have seen thee fightWhen I have envied thy behavior.
Sir,I never loved you much, but I ha’ praised yeWhen you have well deserved ten times as muchAs I have said you did.
Enjoy thy plainness. It nothing ill becomes thee.— Aboard my galley I invite you all. Will you lead, lords?
Show ’s the way, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come.
(aside] Thy father, Pompey, would ne’er have made thistreaty. [To ENOBARBUS] You and I have known, sir.
At sea, I think.
We have, sir.
You have done well by water.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And you by land.
I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great thief by sea.
And you by land.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There I deny my land service. But give me your hand, Menas.
If our eyes had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.
All men’s faces are true, whatsome’er their hands are.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
No slander. They steal hearts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
If he do, sure he cannot weep ’t back again.
You’ve said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony here. Pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caesar’s sister is called Octavia.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True, sir. She was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
Pray ye, sir?
’Tis true.
Then is Caesar and he forever knit together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not prophesy so.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties.
I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity. Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so, which is Mark Antony. Hewill to his Egyptian dish again. Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance. Antony will use his affection where it is. He married but his occasion here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a health for you.
I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats in Egypt.
Come, let’s away.
Here they’ll be, man. Some o’ their plants are ill-rooted already. The least wind i’ th’ world will blow them down.
Lepidus is high-colored.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They have made him drink alms-drink.
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, “No more,” reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th’ drink.
But it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.
Why, this it is to have a name in great men’s fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will do me noservice as a partisan I could not heave.
To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in ’t, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o’ th’ Nile By certain scales i’ th’ Pyramid. They know By th’ height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, And shortly comes to harvest.
You’ve strange serpents there?
Ay, Lepidus.
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun. So is your crocodile.
They are so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To LEPIDUS] Sit, and some wine. A health to Lepidus!
I am not so well as I should be, but I’ll ne’er out.
Not till you have slept. I fear me you’ll be in till then.
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies’ pyramises are very goodly things. Without contradiction I have heard that.
[aside to POMPEY] Pompey, a word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to MENAS] Say in mine ear. What is ’t?
[aside to POMPEY] Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain,And hear me speak a word.
[aside to MENAS] Forbear me till anon.—This wine for Lepidus!
What manner o’ thing is your crocodile?
It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it hath breadth. It is just so high as it is, and moves with its own organs. It lives by that which nourisheth it, and, the elements once out of it, it transmigrates.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What color is it of?
Of it own color too.
’Tis a strange serpent.
’Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
[aside to ANTONY] Will this description satisfy him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to CAESAR] With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.
[aside to MENAS] Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away!Do as I bid you.—Where’s this cup I called for?
[aside to POMPEY] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,Rise from thy stool.
[aside to MENAS] I think th’ art mad.
The matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Thou hast served me with much faith. What’s else to say?— [To the others] Be jolly, lords.
These quicksands, Lepidus,Keep off them, for you sink.
[aside to POMPEY] Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
What sayst thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That’s twice.
How should that be?
But entertain it,And, though thou think me poor, I am the manWill give thee all the world.
Hast thou drunk well?
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup. Thou art, if thou dar’st be, the earthly Jove. Whate’er the ocean pales or sky inclips Is thine, if thou wilt ha ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Show me which way.
These three world-sharers, these competitors, Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable, And, when we are put off, fall to their throats. All there is thine.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done And not have spoke on ’t! In me ’tis villainy, In thee ’t had been good service. Thou must know, ’Tis not my profit that does lead mine honor; Mine honor, it. Repent that e’er thy tongue Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown, I should have found it afterwards well done, But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
[aside] For this, I’ll never follow thy palled fortunes more. Who seeks and will not take when once ’tis offered Shall never find it more.
This health to Lepidus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To a servant] Bear him ashore.—I’ll pledge it for him,Pompey.
Here’s to thee, Menas!
Enobarbus, welcome.
Fill till the cup be hid.
There’s a strong fellow, Menas.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why?
He bearsThe third part of the world, man. Seest not?
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,That it might go on wheels!
Drink thou. Increase the reels.
Come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!Here’s to Caesar.
I could well forbear ’t.It’s monstrous labor when I wash my brainAnd it grows fouler.
Be a child o’ th’ time.
Possess it, I’ll make answer.But I had rather fast from all four daysThan drink so much in one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To ANTONY] Ha! My brave emperor,Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanalsAnd celebrate our drink?
Let’s ha ’t, good soldier.
Come, let’s all take handsTill that the conquering wine hath steeped our senseIn soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands. Make battery to our ears with the loud music, The while I’ll place you; then the boy shall sing. The holding every man shall beat as loud As his strong sides can volley.
(Sings) Come, thou monarch of the vine, Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne! In thy vats our cares be drowned, With thy grapes our hairs be crowned.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](Singing) Cup us till the world go round, Cup us till the world go round!
What would you more? —Pompey, good night. [To ANTONY] Good brother, Let me request you off. Our graver business Frowns at this levity. —Gentle lords, let’s part. You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb Is weaker than the wine; and mine own tongue Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost Anticked us all. What needs more words? Good night. Good Antony, your hand.
I’ll try you on the shore.
And shall, sir. Give ’s your hand.
O Antony, You have my father’s house.But what? We are friends. Come, down into the boat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take heed you fall not.
Menas, I’ll not on shore.
No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets, flutes! What!Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewellTo these great fellows. Sound and be hanged, sound out!
Hoo! says ’a. There’s my cap.
Hoo! Noble captain, come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus’ death Make me revenger. Bear the King’s son’s body Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes, Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Noble Ventidius, Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm, The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media, Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony, Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and Put garlands on thy head.
O Silius, Silius, I have done enough. A lower place, note well, May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius: Better to leave undone than by our deed Acquire too high a fame when him we serve’s away. Caesar and Antony have ever won More in their officer than person. Sossius, One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant, For quick accumulation of renown, Which he achieved by th’ minute, lost his favor. Who does i’ th’ wars more than his captain can Becomes his captain’s captain; and ambition, The soldier’s virtue, rather makes choice of loss Than gain which darkens him. I could do more to do Antonius good, But ’twould offend him, and in his offense Should my performance perish.
Thou hast, Ventidius, thatWithout the which a soldier and his swordGrants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony?
I’ll humbly signify what in his name, That magical word of war, we have effected: How with his banners and his well-paid ranks The ne’er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia We have jaded out o’ th’ field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is he now?
He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what hasteThe weight we must convey with’s will permit,We shall appear before him. [To the soliders] On, there. Pass along!
What, are the brothers parted?
They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone. The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus, Since Pompey’s feast, as Menas says, is troubled With the greensickness.
’Tis a noble Lepidus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A very fine one. Oh, how he loves Caesar!
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Caesar? Why, he’s the Jupiter of men.
What’s Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Antony, O thou Arabian bird!
Would you praise Caesar, say “Caesar.” Go no further.
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
But he loves Caesar best; yet he loves Antony. Hoo! Hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number—hoo!— His love to Antony. But as for Caesar, Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
Both he loves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They are his shards, and he their beetle.
So,This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.
No further, sir.
You take from me a great part of myself; Use me well in ’t. —Sister, prove such a wife As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond Shall pass on thy approof. —Most noble Antony, Let not the piece of virtue, which is set Betwixt us as the cement of our love, To keep it builded, be the ram to batter The fortress of it. For better might we Have loved without this mean, if on both parts This be not cherished.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Make me not offendedIn your distrust.
I have said.
You shall not find, Though you be therein curious, the least cause For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends. We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.The elements be kind to thee and makeThy spirits all of comfort! Fare thee well.
My noble brother!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The April’s in her eyes; it is love’s spring,And these the showers to bring it on. [To OCTAVIA] Be cheerful.
[To CAESAR] Sir, look well to my husband’s house, and—
What, Octavia?
I’ll tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can Her heart inform her tongue —the swan’s-down feather That stands upon the swell at the full of tide And neither way inclines.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to AGRIPPA] Will Caesar weep?
[aside to ENOBARBUS] He has a cloud in ’s face.
[aside to AGRIPPA] He were the worse for that, were he a horse;So is he, being a man.
[aside to ENOBARBUS] Why, Enobarbus, When Antony found Julius Caesar dead, He cried almost to roaring, and he wept When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
[aside to AGRIPPA] That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum.What willingly he did confound he wailed,Believe ’t, till I wept too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][coming forward with OCTAVIA] No, sweet Octavia,You shall hear from me still. The time shall notOutgo my thinking on you.
Come, sir, come,I’ll wrestle with you in my strength of love.Look, here I have you.
Thus I let you goAnd give you to the gods.
Adieu. Be happy.
[To ANTONY] Let all the number of the stars give lightTo thy fair way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, farewell.
Farewell.
Where is the fellow?
Half afeard to come.
Go to, go to.—Come hither, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good majesty,Herod of Jewry dare not look upon youBut when you are well pleased.
That Herod’s headI’ll have! But how? When Antony is gone,Through whom I might command it? [To MESSENGER] Come thou near.
Most gracious majesty!
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Ay, dread Queen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where?
Madam, in Rome.I looked her in the face, and saw her ledBetween her brother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.
That’s not so good. He cannot like her long.
Like her? O Isis, ’tis impossible.
I think so, Charmian. Dull of tongue, and dwarfish.—What majesty is in her gait? Remember,If e’er thou looked’st on majesty.
She creeps. Her motion and her station are as one. She shows a body rather than a life, A statue than a breather.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in EgyptCannot make better note.
He’s very knowing,I do perceive ’t. There’s nothing in her yet.The fellow has good judgment.
Excellent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To MESSENGER] Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam, she was a widow—
Widow? Charmian, hark.
And I do think she’s thirty.
Bear’st thou her face in mind? Is ’t long or round?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Round, even to faultiness.
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.Her hair, what color?
Brown, madam, and her foreheadAs low as she would wish it.
[giving money] There’s gold for thee. Thou must not take my former sharpness ill. I will employ thee back again; I find thee Most fit for business. Go make thee ready; Our letters are prepared.
A proper man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, he is so. I repent me muchThat so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,This creature’s no such thing.
Nothing, madam.
The man hath seen some majesty and should know.
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,And serving you so long!
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian—But ’tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to meWhere I will write. All may be well enough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I warrant you, madam.
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that— That were excusable, that and thousands more Of semblable import —but he hath waged New wars ’gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it To public ear; Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly He vented them, most narrow measure lent me. When the best hint was given him, he not took ’t, Or did it from his teeth.
O my good lord, Believe not all, or, if you must believe, Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady, If this division chance, ne’er stood between, Praying for both parts. The good gods will mock me presently, When I shall pray “O bless my lord and husband!” Undo that prayer by crying out as loud “O bless my brother!” Husband win, win brother Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway ’Twixt these extremes at all.
Gentle Octavia, Let your best love draw to that point which seeks Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor, I lose myself; better I were not yours Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested, Yourself shall go between ’s. The meantime, lady, I’ll raise the preparation of a war Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste; So your desires are yours.
Thanks to my lord. The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak, Your reconciler! Wars ’twixt you twain would be As if the world should cleave, and that slain men Should solder up the rift.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When it appears to you where this begins, Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults Can never be so equal that your love Can equally move with them. Provide your going; Choose your own company and command what cost Your heart has mind to.
How now, friend Eros!
There’s strange news come, sir.
What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is old. What is the success?
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars ’gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality, would not let himpartake in the glory of the action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal seizes him. So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,And throw between them all the food thou hast,They’ll grind the one the other. Where’s Antony?
He’s walking in the garden— (imitating anger) thus, and spurns The rush that lies before him; cries, “Fool Lepidus!” And threats the throat of that his officer That murdered Pompey.
Our great navy’s rigged.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:My lord desires you presently. My newsI might have told hereafter.
’Twill be naught,But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
Come, sir.
Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more In Alexandria. Here’s the manner of ’t: I’ th’ marketplace, on a tribunal silvered, Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat Caesarion, whom they call my father’s son, And all the unlawful issue that their lust Since then hath made between them. Unto her He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, Absolute Queen.
This in the public eye?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ th’ common showplace, where they exercise. His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings: Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia . She In th’ habiliments of the goddess Isis That day appeared, and oft before gave audience, As ’tis reported, so.
Let Rome be thus informed.
Who, queasy with his insolence already,Will their good thoughts call from him.
The people knows it, and have now receivedHis accusations.
Who does he accuse?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar, and that, having in Sicily Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him His part o’ th’ isle. Then does he say he lent me Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets That Lepidus of the triumvirate Should be deposed, and, being, that we detain All his revenue.
Sir, this should be answered.
’Tis done already, and the messenger gone. I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel, That he his high authority abused And did deserve his change. For what I have conquered, I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia, And other of his conquered kingdoms, I Demand the like.
He’ll never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar!
That ever I should call thee castaway!
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.
Why have you stol’n upon us thus? You come not Like Caesar’s sister. The wife of Antony Should have an army for an usher and The neighs of horse to tell of her approach Long ere she did appear. The trees by th’ way Should have borne men, and expectation fainted, Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust Should have ascended to the roof of heaven, Raised by your populous troops. But you are come A market-maid to Rome and have prevented The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown, Is often left unloved. We should have met you By sea and land, supplying every stage With an augmented greeting.
Good my lord, To come thus was I not constrained, but did it On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony, Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted My grievèd ear withal, whereon I begged His pardon for return.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which soon he granted,Being an obstruct ’tween his lust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
I have eyes upon him,And his affairs come to me on the wind.Where is he now?
My lord, in Athens.
No, my most wrongèd sister. Cleopatra Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire Up to a whore; who now are levying The kings o’ th’ earth for war. He hath assembled Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus, Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas; King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont; Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, King Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas, The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia, With a more larger list of scepters.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay me, most wretched,That have my heart parted betwixt two friendsThat does afflict each other!
Welcome hither. Your letters did withhold our breaking forth Till we perceived both how you were wrong led And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart. Be you not troubled with the time, which drives O’er your content these strong necessities, But let determined things to destiny Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome, Nothing more dear to me. You are abused Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods, To do you justice, makes his ministers Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort, And ever welcome to us.
Welcome, lady.
Welcome, dear madam. Each heart in Rome does love and pity you. Only th’ adulterous Antony, most large In his abominations, turns you off And gives his potent regiment to a trull That noises it against us.
[To CAESAR] Is it so, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray youBe ever known to patience. My dear’st sister!
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forspoke my being in these warsAnd sayst it is not fit.
Well, is it, is it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is ’t not denounced against us? Why should not weBe there in person?
Well, I could reply, If we should serve with horse and mares together, The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear A soldier and his horse.
What is ’t you say?
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony, Take from his heart, take from his brain, from ’s time What should not then be spared. He is already Traduced for levity, and ’tis said in Rome That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids Manage this war.
Sink Rome! And their tongues rot That speak against us! A charge we bear i’ th’ war, And as the president of my kingdom will Appear there for a man. Speak not against it. I will not stay behind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I have done.Here comes the Emperor.
Is it not strange, Canidius, That from Tarentum and Brundusium He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea And take in Toryne? —You have heard on ’t, sweet?
Celerity is never more admiredThan by the negligent.
A good rebuke, Which might have well becomed the best of men, To taunt at slackness. —Canidius, we will fight With him by sea.
By sea, what else?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why willMy lord do so?
For that he dares us to ’t.
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia, Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers, Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off, And so should you.
Your ships are not well manned, Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar’s fleet Are those that often have ’gainst Pompey fought. Their ships are yare, yours, heavy. No disgrace Shall fall you for refusing him at sea, Being prepared for land.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By sea, by sea.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away The absolute soldiership you have by land, Distract your army, which doth most consist Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted Your own renownèd knowledge, quite forego The way which promises assurance, and Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard From firm security.
I’ll fight at sea.
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.
Our overplus of shipping will we burn, And with the rest full-manned, from th’ head of Actium Beat th’ approaching Caesar. But if we fail, We then can do ’t at land.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy business?
The news is true, my lord. He is descried.Caesar has taken Toryne.
Can he be there in person? ’Tis impossible, Strange that his power should be. Canidius, Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land, And our twelve thousand horse. We’ll to our ship. Away, my Thetis!
How now, worthy soldier?
O noble Emperor, do not fight by sea! Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt This sword and these my wounds? Let th’ Egyptians And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We Have used to conquer standing on the earth And fighting foot to foot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, well, away.
By Hercules, I think I am i’ th’ right.
Soldier, thou art; but his whole action growsNot in the power on ’t. So our leader’s led,And we are women’s men.
You keep by landThe legions and the horse whole, do you not?
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius, Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea; But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar’s Carries beyond belief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]While he was yet in RomeHis power went out in such distractions asBeguiled all spies.
Who’s his lieutenant, hear you?
They say, one Taurus.
Well I know the man.
The Emperor calls Canidius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With news the time’s with labor, and throws forthEach minute some.
Taurus!
My lord?
Strike not by land; keep whole. Provoke not battleTill we have done at sea. Do not exceedThe prescript of this scroll.
Our fortune liesUpon this jump.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Set we our squadrons on yond side o’ th’ hill, In eye of Caesar’s battle, from which place We may the number of the ships behold And so proceed accordingly.
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer. Th’ Antoniad , the Egyptian admiral, With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder. To see ’t mine eyes are blasted.
Gods and goddesses,All the whole synod of them!
What’s thy passion?
The greater cantle of the world is lostWith very ignorance. We have kissed awayKingdoms and provinces.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How appears the fight?
On our side like the tokened pestilence, Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt— Whom leprosy o’ertake!—i’ th’ midst o’ th’ fight, When vantage like a pair of twins appeared Both as the same, or rather ours the elder, The breeze upon her, like a cow in June, Hoists sails and flies.
That I beheld.Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could notEndure a further view.
She once being loofed, The noble ruin of her magic, Antony, Claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard Leaving the fight in height, flies after her. I never saw an action of such shame. Experience, manhood, honor, ne’er before Did violate so itself.
Alack, alack!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our fortune on the sea is out of breath And sinks most lamentably. Had our general Been what he knew himself, it had gone well. Oh, he has given example for our flight Most grossly by his own!
Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then, good night indeed.
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
’Tis easy to ’t, and there I will attendWhat further comes.
To Caesar will I renderMy legions and my horse. Six kings alreadyShow me the way of yielding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll yet followThe wounded chance of Antony, though my reasonSits in the wind against me.
Hark. The land bids me tread no more upon ’t. It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither. I am so lated in the world that I Have lost my way forever. I have a ship Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly And make your peace with Caesar.
Fly? Not we.
I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone. I have myself resolved upon a course Which has no need of you. Begone. My treasure’s in the harbor. Take it. Oh, I followed that I blush to look upon! My very hairs do mutiny, for the white Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them For fear and doting. Friends, begone. You shall Have letters from me to some friends that will Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad, Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left Which leaves itself. To the seaside straightway! I will possess you of that ship and treasure. Leave me, I pray, a little. Pray you now, Nay, do so, for indeed I have lost command. Therefore I pray you. I’ll see you by and by.
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do, most dear Queen.
Do. Why, what else?
Let me sit down. O Juno!
[seeing CLEOPATRA] No, no, no, no, no.
See you here, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, fie, fie, fie!
Madam!
Madam, O good Empress!
Sir, sir—
[aside] Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept His sword e’en like a dancer, while I struck The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and ’twas I That the mad Brutus ended. He alone Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had In the brave squares of war, yet now—no matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, stand by.
The Queen, my lord, the Queen.
Go to him, madam, speak to him.He is unqualitied with very shame.
Well then, sustain me. Oh!
Most noble sir, arise. The Queen approaches.Her head’s declined, and death will seize her butYour comfort makes the rescue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have offended reputation,A most unnoble swerving.
Sir, the Queen.
Oh, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See How I convey my shame out of thine eyes By looking back what I have left behind ’Stroyed in dishonor.
O my lord, my lord,Forgive my fearful sails! I little thoughtYou would have followed.
Egypt, thou knew’st too well My heart was to thy rudder tied by th’ strings, And thou shouldst tow me after. O’er my spirit Thy full supremacy thou knew’st, and that Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods Command me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, my pardon!
Now I must To the young man send humble treaties, dodge And palter in the shifts of lowness, who With half the bulk o’ th’ world played as I pleased, Making and marring fortunes. You did know How much you were my conqueror, and that My sword, made weak by my affection, would Obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon!
Fall not a tear, I say. One of them ratesAll that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.
Even this repays me.— We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?— Love, I am full of lead.— [calling] Some wine, Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him appear that’s come from Antony.Know you him?
Caesar, ’tis his schoolmaster— An argument that he is plucked, when hither He sends so poor a pinion of his wing, Which had superfluous kings for messengers Not many moons gone by.
Approach and speak.
Such as I am, I come from Antony. I was of late as petty to his ends As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf To his grand sea.
Be ’t so. Declare thine office.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and Requires to live in Egypt; which not granted, He lessens his requests, and to thee sues To let him breathe between the heavens and earth A private man in Athens. This for him. Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness, Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs, Now hazarded to thy grace.
For Antony, I have no ears to his request. The Queen Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she From Egypt drive her all-disgracèd friend Or take his life there. This if she perform, She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Bring him through the bands.
[To THIDIAS] To try thy eloquence now ’tis time. Dispatch. From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise, And in our name, what she requires. Add more, From thine invention, offers. Women are not In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure The ne’er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias. Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we Will answer as a law.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar, I go.
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,And what thou think’st his very action speaksIn every power that moves.
Caesar, I shall.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think and die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Antony only, that would make his will Lord of his reason. What though you fled From that great face of war, whose several ranges Frighted each other? Why should he follow? The itch of his affection should not then Have nicked his captainship at such a point When half to half the world opposed, he being The merèd question. ’Twas a shame no less Than was his loss, to course your flying flags And leave his navy gazing.
Prithee, peace.
Is that his answer?
Ay, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Queen shall then have courtesy, so sheWill yield us up?
He says so.
Let her know ’t.— [To CLEOPATRA] To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head, And he will fill thy wishes to the brim With principalities.
That head, my lord?
[To the AMBASSADOR] To him again. Tell him he wears therose Of youth upon him, from which the world should note Something particular. His coin, ships, legions, May be a coward’s, whose ministers would prevail Under the service of a child as soon As i’ th’ command of Caesar. I dare him therefore To lay his gay caparisons apart And answer me declined, sword against sword, Ourselves alone. I’ll write it. Follow me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will Unstate his happiness and be staged to th’ show Against a sworder! I see men’s judgments are A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward Do draw the inward quality after them To suffer all alike. That he should dream, Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued His judgment too.
A messenger from Caesar.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women, Against the blown rose may they stop their nose, That kneeled unto the buds.—Admit him, sir.
[aside] Mine honesty and I begin to square. The loyalty well held to fools does make Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure To follow with allegiance a fall’n lord Does conquer him that did his master conquer And earns a place i’ th’ story.
Caesar’s will?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear it apart.
None but friends. Say boldly.
So haply are they friends to Antony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has, Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar’s.
So.— Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats Not to consider in what case thou stand’st, Further than he is Caesar.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go on. Right royal.
He knows that you embrace not AntonyAs you did love, but as you feared him.
Oh!
The scars upon your honor therefore heDoes pity as constrainèd blemishes,Not as deserved.
He is a god and knowsWhat is most right. Mine honor was not yielded,But conquered merely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] To be sure of that, I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for Thy dearest quit thee.
Shall I say to Caesar What you require of him? For he partly begs To be desired to give. It much would please him That of his fortunes you should make a staff To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits To hear from me you had left Antony And put yourself under his shroud, The universal landlord.
What’s your name?
My name is Thidias.
Most kind messenger, Say to great Caesar this in deputation: I kiss his conqu’ring hand. Tell him I am prompt To lay my crown at ’s feet, and there to kneel. Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear The doom of Egypt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]’Tis your noblest course. Wisdom and fortune combating together, If that the former dare but what it can, No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay My duty on your hand.
Your Caesar’s father oft, When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in, Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place As it rained kisses.
Favors? By Jove that thunders!What art thou, fellow?
One that but performsThe bidding of the fullest man, and worthiestTo have command obeyed.
You will be whipped.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](calling for servants] Approach, there! [To THIDIAS] Ah, you kite!—Now, gods and devils! Authority melts from me. Of late, when I cried “Ho!” Like boys unto a muss kings would start forth And cry, “Your will?” (calling to servants] Have you no ears? I am Antony yet.
Take hence this jack and whip him.
[aside] ’Tis better playing with a lion’s whelpThan with an old one dying.
Moon and stars! Whip him. Were ’t twenty of the greatest tributaries That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them So saucy with the hand of she here—what’s her name Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows, Till like a boy, you see him cringe his face And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.
Mark Antony—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tug him away! Being whipped,Bring him again. This jack of Caesar’s shallBear us an errand to him.
[To CLEOPATRA] You were half blasted ere I knew you. Ha! Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome, Forborne the getting of a lawful race, And by a gem of women, to be abused By one that looks on feeders?
Good my lord—
You have been a boggler ever. But when we in our viciousness grow hard— Oh, misery on ’t!— the wise gods seel our eyes, In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us Adore our errors, laugh at ’s while we strut To our confusion.
Oh, is ’t come to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I found you as a morsel cold upon Dead Caesar’s trencher. Nay, you were a fragment Of Gneius Pompey’s, besides what hotter hours, Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure, Though you can guess what temperance should be, You know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a fellow that will take rewards And say “God quit you!” be familiar with My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal And plighter of high hearts! Oh, that I were Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar The hornèd herd! For I have savage cause, And to proclaim it civilly were like A haltered neck which does the hangman thank For being yare about him.
Is he whipped?
Soundly, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cried he? And begged he pardon?
He did ask favor.
[To THIDIAS] If that thy father live, let him repent Thou wast not made his daughter, and be thou sorry To follow Caesar in his triumph, since Thou hast been whipped for following him. Henceforth The white hand of a lady fever thee; Shake thou to look on ’t. Get thee back to Caesar. Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say He makes me angry with him, for he seems Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am, Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry, And at this time most easy ’tis to do ’t, When my good stars, that were my former guides, Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires Into th’ abysm of hell. If he mislike My speech and what is done, tell him he has Hipparchus, my enfranchèd bondman, whom He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture, As he shall like, to quit me. Urge it thou. Hence with thy stripes, begone!
Have you done yet?
Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed,And it portends alone the fall of Antony.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] I must stay his time.
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyesWith one that ties his points?
Not know me yet?
Coldhearted toward me?
Ah, dear, if I be so, From my cold heart let heaven engender hail, And poison it in the source, and the first stone Drop in my neck. As it determines, so Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite, Till by degrees the memory of my womb, Together with my brave Egyptians all, By the discandying of this pelleted storm Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile Have buried them for prey!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am satisfied. Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where I will oppose his fate. Our force by land Hath nobly held. Our severed navy too Have knit again, and fleet, threat’ning most sealike. Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady? If from the field I shall return once more To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood. I and my sword will earn our chronicle. There’s hope in ’t yet.
That’s my brave lord!
I will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed, And fight maliciously. For when mine hours Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives Of me for jests; but now I’ll set my teeth And send to darkness all that stop me. Come, Let’s have one other gaudy night. Call to me All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more. Let’s mock the midnight bell.
It is my birthday.I had thought t’ have held it poor; but since my lordIs Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To ENOBARBUS] Call all his noble captains to my lord.
Do so. We’ll speak to them, and tonight I’ll force The wine peep through their scars. —Come on, my Queen, There’s sap in ’t yet. The next time I do fight I’ll make Death love me, for I will contend Even with his pestilent scythe.
Now he’ll outstare the lightning. To be furious Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still A diminution in our captain’s brain Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason, It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek Some way to leave him.
He calls me “boy” and chides as he had power To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat, Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know I have many other ways to die, meantime Laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must think When one so great begins to rage, he’s hunted Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now Make boot of his distraction. Never anger Made good guard for itself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let our best heads Know that tomorrow the last of many battles We mean to fight. Within our files there are, Of those that served Mark Antony but late, Enough to fetch him in . See it done And feast the army. We have store to do ’t, And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony!
He will not fight with me, Domitius?
No.
Why should he not?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,He is twenty men to one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tomorrow, soldier, By sea and land I’ll fight. Or I will live Or bathe my dying honor in the blood Shall make it live again. Woo’t thou fight well?
I’ll strike and cry, “Take all.”
Well said. Come on!Call forth my household servants.
Let’s tonightBe bounteous at our meal.
Give me thy hand. Thou hast been rightly honest.—So hast thou,— Thou,—and thou,—and thou. You have served me well, And kings have been your fellows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to ENOBARBUS] What means this?
[aside to CLEOPATRA] ’Tis one of those odd tricks whichsorrow shootsOut of the mind.
[To another SERVITOR] And thou art honest too. I wish I could be made so many men, And all of you clapped up together in An Antony, that I might do you service So good as you have done.
The gods forbid!
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. Scant not my cups, and make as much of me As when mine empire was your fellow too, And suffered my command.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to ENOBARBUS] What does he mean?
[aside to CLEOPATRA] To make his followers weep.
[To the SERVITORS] Tend me tonight. May be it is the period of your duty. Haply you shall not see me more, or if, A mangled shadow. Perchance tomorrow You’ll serve another master. I look on you As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends, I turn you not away, but, like a master Married to your good service, stay till death. Tend me tonight two hours, I ask no more, And the gods yield you for ’t!
What mean you, sir, To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep, And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame, Transform us not to women.
Ho, ho, ho! Now the witch take me if I meant it thus! Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty friends, You take me in too dolorous a sense, For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts, I hope well of tomorrow, and will lead you Where rather I’ll expect victorious life Than death and honor. Let’s to supper, come, And drown consideration.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brother, good night. Tomorrow is the day.
It will determine one way. Fare you well.Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
Nothing. What news?
Belike ’tis but a rumor. Good night to you.
Well, sir, good night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soldiers, have careful watch.
And you. Good night, good night.
Here we. And if tomorrowOur navy thrive, I have an absolute hopeOur landmen will stand up.
’Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.
Peace! What noise?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]List, list!
Hark!
Music i’ th’ air.
Under the earth.
It signs well, does it not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No.
Peace, I say! What should this mean?
’Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,Now leaves him.
Walk. Let’s see if other watchmenDo hear what we do.
How now, masters?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][speak together] How now? How now? Do you hear this?
Ay. Is ’t not strange?
Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter;Let’s see how it will give off.
Content. ’Tis strange.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][calling] Eros! Mine armor, Eros!
Sleep a little.
No, my chuck.—Eros, come, mine armor, Eros!
Come, good fellow, put thine iron on.If fortune be not ours today, it isBecause we brave her. Come.
Nay, I’ll help too.What’s this for?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, let be, let be! Thou artThe armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this.
Sooth, la, I’ll help. Thus it must be.
Well, well,We shall thrive now.—Seest thou, my good fellow?Go put on thy defenses.
Briefly, sir.
Is not this buckled well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rarely, rarely. He that unbuckles this, till we do please To doff ’t for our repose, shall hear a storm.— Thou fumblest, Eros, and my Queen’s a squire More tight at this than thou. Dispatch. —O love, That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew’st The royal occupation! Thou shouldst see A workman in ’t.
Good morrow to thee. Welcome. Thou look’st like him that knows a warlike charge. To business that we love we rise betimes And go to ’t with delight.
A thousand, sir,Early though ’t be, have on their riveted trimAnd at the port expect you.
The morn is fair. Good morrow, General.
Good morrow, General.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]’Tis well blown, lads. This morning, like the spirit of a youth That means to be of note, begins betimes. So, so. [To CLEOPATRA] Come, give me that. This way. Well said. Fare thee well, dame.
Whate’er becomes of me, This is a soldier’s kiss. Rebukable And worthy shameful check it were to stand On more mechanic compliment. I’ll leave thee Now like a man of steel. [To others] You that will fight, Follow me close. I’ll bring you to ’t. [To CLEOPATRA] Adieu.
Please you retire to your chamber?
Lead me. He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might Determine this great war in single fight! Then Antony—but now—. Well, on.
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailedTo make me fight at land!
Hadst thou done so, The kings that have revolted, and the soldier That has this morning left thee, would have still Followed thy heels.
Who’s gone this morning?
Who? One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar’s camp Say “I am none of thine.”
What sayest thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir,He is with Caesar.
Sir, his chests and treasureHe has not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it. Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him— I will subscribe—gentle adieus and greetings. Say that I wish he never find more cause To change a master. Oh, my fortunes have Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.—Enobarbus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.Our will is Antony be took alive.Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
The time of universal peace is near.Prove this a prosp’rous day, the three-nooked worldShall bear the olive freely.
AntonyIs come into the field.
Go charge Agrippa Plant those that have revolted in the vant, That Antony may seem to spend his fury Upon himself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar And leave his master Antony. For this pains Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest That fell away have entertainment but No honorable trust. I have done ill, Of which I do accuse myself so sorely That I will joy no more.
Enobarbus, Antony Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with His bounty overplus. The messenger Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now Unloading of his mules.
I give it you.
Mock not, Enobarbus. I tell you true. Best you safed the bringer Out of the host. I must attend mine office, Or would have done ’t myself. Your Emperor Continues still a Jove.
I am alone the villain of the earth, And feel I am so most. O Antony, Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid My better service, when my turpitude Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart. If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do ’t, I feel. I fight against thee? No, I will go seek Some ditch wherein to die. The foul’st best fits My latter part of life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far.Caesar himself has work, and our oppressionExceeds what we expected.
O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed!Had we done so at first, we had droven them homeWith clouts about their heads.
Thou bleed’st apace.
I had a wound here that was like a “T,”But now ’tis made an “H.”
They do retire.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We’ll beat ’em into bench-holes. I have yetRoom for six scotches more.
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage servesFor a fair victory.
Let us score their backsAnd snatch ’em up, as we take hares, behind!’Tis sport to maul a runner.
I will reward theeOnce for thy sprightly comfort and tenfoldFor thy good valor. Come thee on.
I’ll halt after.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have beat him to his camp. Run one beforeAnd let the Queen know of our gests.
Tomorrow, Before the sun shall see ’s, we’ll spill the blood That has today escaped. I thank you all, For doughty-handed are you, and have fought Not as you served the cause, but as ’t had been Each man’s like mine. You have shown all Hectors. Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends. Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss The honored gashes whole.
[To SCARUS] Give me thy hand. To this great fairy I’ll commend thy acts, Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o’ the world, (to CLEOPATRA) Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attireand all, Through proof of harness to my heart, and there Ride on the pants triumphing!
Lord of lords!O infinite virtue, com’st thou smiling fromThe world’s great snare uncaught?
Mine nightingale, We have beat them to their beds. What, girl, though gray Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha’ we A brain that nourishes our nerves and can Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man. Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand. [To SCARUS] Kiss it, my warrior.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hath fought todayAs if a god, in hate of mankind, hadDestroyed in such a shape.
[To SCARUS] I’ll give thee, friend,An armor all of gold. It was a king’s.
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled Like holy Phoebus’ car. Give me thy hand. Through Alexandria make a jolly march. Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them. Had our great palace the capacity To camp this host, we all would sup together And drink carouses to the next day’s fate, Which promises royal peril. —Trumpeters, With brazen din blast you the city’s ear; Make mingle with our rattling taborins, That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together, Applauding our approach.
If we be not relieved within this hour, We must return to th’ court of guard. The night Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle By th’ second hour i’ th’ morn.
This last day was a shrewd one to ’s.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O bear me witness, night—
What man is this?
Stand close and list him.
Be witness to me, O thou blessèd moon, When men revolted shall upon record Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did Before thy face repent.
Enobarbus?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace! Hark further.
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy, The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, That life, a very rebel to my will, May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart Against the flint and hardness of my fault, Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony, Nobler than my revolt is infamous, Forgive me in thine own particular, But let the world rank me in register A master-leaver and a fugitive. O Antony! O Antony!
Let’s speak to him.
Let’s hear him, for the things he speaks may concern Caesar.
Let’s do so. But he sleeps.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as hisWas never yet for sleep.
Go we to him.
Awake, sir, awake. Speak to us.
Hear you, sir?
The hand of death hath raught him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark, the drums Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him To th’ court of guard. He is of note. Our hour Is fully out.
Come on, then. He may recover yet.
Their preparation is today by sea.We please them not by land.
For both, my lord.
I would they’d fight i’ th’ fire or i’ th’ air, We’d fight there too. But this it is: our foot Upon the hills adjoining to the city Shall stay with us. Order for sea is given; They have put forth the haven, Where their appointment we may best discover And look on their endeavor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But being charged, we will be still by land— Which, as I take ’t, we shall, for his best force Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales, And hold our best advantage.
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does standI shall discover all. I’ll bring thee wordStraight how ’tis like to go.
Swallows have built In Cleopatra’s sails their nests. The auguries Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly, And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony Is valiant and dejected, and by starts His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear Of what he has and has not.
All is lost! This foul Egyptian hath betrayèd me. My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder They cast their caps up and carouse together Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! ’Tis thou Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly, For when I am revenged upon my charm, I have done all. Bid them all fly. Begone!
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more. Fortune and Antony part here. Even here Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked That overtopped them all. Betrayed I am. Oh, this false soul of Egypt! This grave charm, Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them home, Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end, Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose Beguiled me to the very heart of loss. [calling out] What, Eros, Eros!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged against his love?
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving, And blemish Caesar’s triumph. Let him take thee And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians! Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot Of all thy sex. Most monsterlike be shown For poor’st diminutives, for dolts, and let Patient Octavia plow thy visage up With her preparèd nails!
’Tis well th’art gone, If it be well to live, but better ’twere Thou fell’st into my fury, for one death Might have prevented many. —Eros, ho!— The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me, Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage. Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o’ th’ moon, And with those hands that grasped the heaviest club Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die. To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall Under this plot. She dies for ’t. —Eros, ho!
Help me, my women! Oh, he’s more madThan Telamon for his shield. The boar of ThessalyWas never so embossed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To th’ monument! There lock yourself and send him word you are dead. The soul and body rive not more in parting Than greatness going off.
To th’ monument!— Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself. Say that the last I spoke was “Antony,” And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian, And bring me how he takes my death. [To the others] To th’ monument!
Eros, thou yet behold’st me?
Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud that’s dragonish, A vapor sometime like a bear or lion, A towered citadel, a pendant rock, A forkèd mountain, or blue promontory With trees upon ’t that nod unto the world And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs. They are black vesper’s pageants.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my lord.
That which is now a horse, even with a thoughtThe rack dislimns and makes it indistinctAs water is in water.
It does, my lord.
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is Even such a body. Here I am Antony, Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen, Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine— Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto ’t A million more, now lost —she, Eros, has Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory Unto an enemy’s triumph. Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us Ourselves to end ourselves.
Oh, thy vile lady!She has robbed me of my sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, Antony,My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingledWith thine entirely.
Hence, saucy eunuch! Peace!She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.
Death of one person can be paid but once, And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake Was “Antony, most noble Antony!” Then in the midst a tearing groan did break The name of Antony. It was divided Between her heart and lips. She rendered life, Thy name so buried in her.
Dead, then?
Dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unarm, Eros. The long day’s task is done,And we must sleep. [To MARDIAN] That thou depart’st hence safeDoes pay thy labor richly. Go.
Off, pluck off! The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides! Heart, once be stronger than thy continent. Crack thy frail case!—Apace, Eros, apace. No more a soldier. Bruisèd pieces, go. You have been nobly borne. (to EROS) From me awhile.
I will o’ertake thee, Cleopatra, and Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now All length is torture. Since the torch is out, Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor Mars what it does. Yea, very force entangles Itself with strength. Seal then, and all is done.— Eros! —I come, my Queen. —Eros!— Stay for me. Where souls do couch on flowers, we’ll hand in hand, And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze. Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops, And all the haunt be ours. —Come, Eros, Eros!
What would my lord?
Since Cleopatra died I have lived in such dishonor that the gods Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword Quartered the world, and o’er green Neptune’s back With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack The courage of a woman —less noble mind Than she which by her death our Caesar tells “I am conqueror of myself.” Thou art sworn, Eros, That when the exigent should come which now Is come indeed, when I should see behind me Th’ inevitable prosecution of Disgrace and horror, that on my command, Thou then wouldst kill me . Do ’t. The time is come. Thou strik’st not me, ’tis Caesar thou defeat’st. Put color in thy cheek.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gods withhold me!Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,Though enemy, lost aim and could not?
Eros, Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down His corrigible neck, his face subdued To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded His baseness that ensued?
I would not see ’t.
Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured.Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast wornMost useful for thy country.
O sir, pardon me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I did make thee free, swor’st thou not then To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once, Or thy precedent services are all But accidents unpurposed. Draw and come.
Turn from me then that noble countenanceWherein the worship of the whole world lies.
Lo thee!
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at onceThe thing why thou hast drawn it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My dear master,My captain, and my emperor, let me say,Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
’Tis said, man, and farewell.
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?
Now, Eros.
Why, there then!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus I do escape the sorrowOf Antony’s death.
Thrice nobler than myself, Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what I should and thou couldst not. My Queen and Eros Have by their brave instruction got upon me A nobleness in record. But I will be A bridegroom in my death, and run into ’t As to a lover’s bed. Come then, and Eros, Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus I learned of thee.
How! Not dead? Not dead?The guard, ho! Oh, dispatch me!
What’s the noise?
I have done my work ill, friends. Oh, make an endOf what I have begun!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The star is fall’n.
And time is at his period.
Alas, and woe!
Let him that loves me strike me dead.
Not I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor I.
Nor anyone.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,Shall enter me with him.
Where’s Antony?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There, Diomed, there.
Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man?
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give meSufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute lord,My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, my lord.
Where is she?
Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying fear Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw— Which never shall be found—you did suspect She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead. But fearing since how it might work, hath sent Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come, I dread, too late.
Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.
What ho, the Emperor’s guard! The guard, what ho!Come, your lord calls!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.’Tis the last service that I shall command you.
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wearAll your true followers out.
Most heavy day!
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome Which comes to punish us, and we punish it, Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up. I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends, And have my thanks for all.
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I will not. All strange and terrible events are welcome, But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow, Proportioned to our cause, must be as great As that which makes it.
How now? Is he dead?
His death’s upon him, but not dead.Look out o’ th’ other side your monument.His guard have brought him thither.
O sun, Burn the great sphere thou mov’st in. Darkling stand The varying shore o’ th’ world! O Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help! Help, friends below! Let’s draw him hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace!Not Caesar’s valor hath o’erthrown Antony,But Antony’s hath triumphed on itself.
So it should be, that none but AntonyShould conquer Antony, but woe ’tis so!
I am dying, Egypt, dying. Only I here importune death awhile, until Of many thousand kisses the poor last I lay upon thy lips.
I dare not, dear, Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not, Lest I be taken. Not th’ imperious show Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall Be brooched with me. If knife, drugs, serpents, have Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe. Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony— Help me, my women—We must draw thee up. Assist, good friends.
Oh, quick, or I am gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here’s sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord! Our strength is all gone into heaviness, That makes the weight. Had I great Juno’s power, The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up And set thee by Jove’s side. Yet come a little. Wishers were ever fools. Oh, come, come, come!
And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived.Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,Thus would I wear them out.
A heavy sight!
I am dying, Egypt, dying.Give me some wine and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak, and let me rail so highThat the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,Provoked by my offense.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One word, sweet Queen:Of Caesar seek your honor, with your safety—Oh!
They do not go together.
Gentle, hear me.None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
My resolution and my hands I’ll trust,None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts In feeding them with those my former fortunes, Wherein I lived the greatest prince o’ th’ world, The noblest, and do now not basely die, Not cowardly put off my helmet to My countryman —a Roman by a Roman Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going. I can no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Noblest of men, woo’t die? Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide In this dull world, which in thy absence is No better than a sty? O see, my women, The crown o’ th’ earth doth melt. My lord!
Oh, withered is the garland of the war. The soldier’s pole is fall’n! Young boys and girls Are level now with men. The odds is gone, And there is nothing left remarkable Beneath the visiting moon.
Oh, quietness, lady!
She’s dead too, our sovereign.
Lady!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam!
O madam, madam, madam!
Royal Egypt, Empress!
Peace, peace, Iras.
No more but e’en a woman, and commanded By such poor passion as the maid that milks And does the meanest chares. It were for me To throw my scepter at the injurious gods, To tell them that this world did equal theirs Till they had stolen our jewel. All’s but naught. Patience is sottish, and impatience does Become a dog that’s mad. Then is it sin To rush into the secret house of death Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women? What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian? My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look, Our lamp is spent, it’s out. Good sirs, take heart. We’ll bury him, and then, what’s brave, what’s noble, Let’s do ’t after the high Roman fashion And make death proud to take us. Come, away. This case of that huge spirit now is cold. Ah, women, women! Come. We have no friend But resolution, and the briefest end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocksThe pauses that he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar’stAppear thus to us?
I am called Dercetus. Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke, He was my master, and I wore my life To spend upon his haters. If thou please To take me to thee, as I was to him I’ll be to Caesar. If thou pleasest not, I yield thee up my life.
What is ’t thou say’st?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thing should make A greater crack. The round world Should have shook lions into civil streets And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony Is not a single doom. In the name lay A moiety of the world.
He is dead, Caesar, Not by a public minister of justice, Nor by a hirèd knife, but that self hand Which writ his honor in the acts it did Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it, Splitted the heart. This is his sword. I robbed his wound of it. Behold it stained With his most noble blood.
Look you, sad friends,The gods rebuke me, but it is tidingsTo wash the eyes of kings.
And strange it isThat nature must compel us to lamentOur most persisted deeds.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His taints and honorsWaged equal with him.
A rarer spirit neverDid steer humanity, but you gods will give usSome faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.
When such a spacious mirror’s set before him,He needs must see himself.
O Antony, I have followed thee to this, but we do launch Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce Have shown to thee such a declining day, Or look on thine. We could not stall together In the whole world. But yet let me lament With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts That thou, my brother, my competitor In top of all design, my mate in empire, Friend and companion in the front of war, The arm of mine own body, and the heart Where mine his thoughts did kindle —that our stars, Unreconcilable, should divide Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends—
But I will tell you at some meeter season. The business of this man looks out of him. We’ll hear him what he says. (to EGYPTIAN) Whence are you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress, Confined in all she has, her monument, Of thy intents desires instruction, That she preparedly may frame herself To th’ way she’s forced to.
Bid her have good heart. She soon shall know of us, by some of ours, How honorable and how kindly we Determine for her, for Caesar cannot live To be ungentle.
So the gods preserve thee!
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts The quality of her passion shall require, Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke She do defeat us, for her life in Rome Would be eternal in our triumph. Go, And with your speediest bring us what she says And how you find of her.
Caesar, I shall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gallus, go you along.
Where’s Dolabella,To second Proculeius?
Dolabella!
Let him alone, for I remember now How he’s employed. He shall in time be ready. Go with me to my tent, where you shall see How hardly I was drawn into this war, How calm and gentle I proceeded still In all my writings. Go with me and see What I can show in this.
My desolation does begin to make A better life. ’Tis paltry to be Caesar. Not being Fortune, he’s but Fortune’s knave, A minister of her will. And it is great To do that thing that ends all other deeds, Which shackles accidents and bolts up change, Which sleeps and never palates more the dung, The beggar’s nurse, and Caesar’s.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,And bids thee study on what fair demandsThou mean’st to have him grant thee.
What’s thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Antony Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but I do not greatly care to be deceived, That have no use for trusting. If your master Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him, That majesty, to keep decorum, must No less beg than a kingdom. If he please To give me conquered Egypt for my son, He gives me so much of mine own as I Will kneel to him with thanks.
Be of good cheer. You’re fall’n into a princely hand. Fear nothing. Make your full reference freely to my lord, Who is so full of grace that it flows over On all that need. Let me report to him Your sweet dependency, and you shall find A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness Where he for grace is kneeled to.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, tell him I am his fortune’s vassal, and I send him The greatness he has got. I hourly learn A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly Look him i’ th’ face.
This I’ll report, dear lady.Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitiedOf him that caused it.
You see how easily she may be surprised. [To the soldiers] Guard her till Caesar come.
Royal Queen!
O Cleopatra! Thou art taken, Queen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Quick, quick, good hands.
Hold, worthy lady, hold!Do not yourself such wrong, who are in thisRelieved but not betrayed.
What, of death too,That rids our dogs of languish?
Cleopatra,Do not abuse my master’s bounty byTh’ undoing of yourself. Let the world seeHis nobleness well acted, which your deathWill never let come forth.
Where art thou, Death?Come hither, come! Come, come and take a queenWorth many babes and beggars!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, temperance, lady!
Sir, I will eat no meat, I’ll not drink, sir. If idle talk will once be necessary, I’ll not sleep neither. This mortal house I’ll ruin, Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I Will not wait pinioned at your master’s court, Nor once be chastised with the sober eye Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up And show me to the shouting varletry Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt Be gentle grave unto me. Rather on Nilus’ mud Lay me stark naked and let the waterflies Blow me into abhorring. Rather make My country’s high pyramides my gibbet And hang me up in chains!
You do extendThese thoughts of horror further than you shallFind cause in Caesar.
Proculeius, What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows, And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen, I’ll take her to my guard.
So, Dolabella, It shall content me best. Be gentle to her. [To CLEOPATRA] To Caesar I will speak what you shall please, If you’ll employ me to him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say I would die.
Most noble Empress, you have heard of me?
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams.Is ’t not your trick?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I understand not, madam.
I dreamt there was an emperor Antony.Oh, such another sleep, that I might seeBut such another man!
If it might please ye—
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuckA sun and moon, which kept their course and lightedThe little “O,” the earth.
Most sovereign creature—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His legs bestrid the ocean. His reared arm Crested the world. His voice was propertied As all the tunèd spheres, and that to friends. But when he meant to quail and shake the orb, He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty, There was no winter in ’t, an autumn ’twas That grew the more by reaping. His delights Were dolphinlike; they showed his back above The element they lived in. In his livery Walked crowns and crownets. Realms and islands were As plates dropped from his pocket.
Cleopatra—
Think you there was or might be such a manAs this I dreamt of?
Gentle madam, no.
You lie up to the hearing of the gods. But if there be nor ever were one such, It’s past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t’ imagine An Antony were nature’s piece ’gainst fancy, Condemning shadows quite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear me, good madam. Your loss is as yourself, great, and you bear it As answering to the weight. Would I might never O’ertake pursued success, but I do feel, By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites My very heart at root.
I thank you, sir.Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.
Nay, pray you, sir.
Though he be honorable—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’ll lead me, then, in triumph.
Madam, he will. I know ’t.
Make way there! Caesar!
Which is the Queen of Egypt?
[To CLEOPATRA] It is the Emperor, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Arise, you shall not kneel.I pray you, rise. Rise, Egypt.
Sir, the godsWill have it thus. My master and my lordI must obey.
Take to you no hard thoughts. The record of what injuries you did us, Though written in our flesh, we shall remember As things but done by chance.
Sole sir o’ th’ world, I cannot project mine own cause so well To make it clear, but do confess I have Been laden with like frailties which before Have often shamed our sex.
Cleopatra, know We will extenuate rather than enforce. If you apply yourself to our intents, Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find A benefit in this change, but if you seek To lay on me a cruelty by taking Antony’s course, you shall bereave yourself Of my good purposes and put your children To that destruction which I’ll guard them from If thereon you rely. I’ll take my leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And may, through all the world! ’Tis yours, and we,Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shallHang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewelsI am possessed of. ’Tis exactly valued,Not petty things admitted. Where’s Seleucus?
Here, madam.
This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord, Upon his peril, that I have reserved To myself nothing. — Speak the truth, Seleucus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I had rather seal my lipsThan to my peril speak that which is not.
What have I kept back?
Enough to purchase what you have made known.
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approveYour wisdom in the deed.
See, Caesar! Oh, behold How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours, And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine. The ingratitude of this Seleucus does Even make me wild. [To SELEUCUS] O slave, of no more trust Than love that’s hired! What, goest thou back? Thou shalt Go back, I warrant thee! But I’ll catch thine eyes, Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog! Oh, rarely base!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Queen, let us entreat you—
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this, That thou, vouchsafing here to visit me, Doing the honor of thy lordliness To one so meek, that mine own servant should Parcel the sum of my disgraces by Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar, That I some lady trifles have reserved, Immoment toys, things of such dignity As we greet modern friends withal, and say Some nobler token I have kept apart For Livia and Octavia, to induce Their mediation, must I be unfolded With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me Beneath the fall I have. [To SELEUCUS] Prithee, go hence, Or I shall show the cinders of my spirit Through th’ ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man, Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Forbear, Seleucus.
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought For things that others do, and when we fall We answer others’ merits in our name, Are therefore to be pitied.
Cleopatra, Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged Put we i’ th’ roll of conquest. Still be ’t yours. Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe Caesar’s no merchant, to make prize with you Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheered. Make not your thoughts your prison. No, dear Queen, For we intend so to dispose you as Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep. Our care and pity is so much upon you That we remain your friend. And so, adieu.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My master, and my lord!
Not so. Adieu.
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should notBe noble to myself. But, hark thee, Charmian.
Finish, good lady. The bright day is done,And we are for the dark.
[To CHARMIAN] Hie thee again.I have spoke already, and it is provided.Go put it to the haste.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I will.
Where’s the Queen?
Behold, sir.
Dolabella!
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command, Which my love makes religion to obey, I tell you this: Caesar through Syria Intends his journey, and within three days You with your children will he send before. Make your best use of this. I have performed Your pleasure and my promise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dolabella,I shall remain your debtor.
I your servant.Adieu, good Queen. I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell, and thanks.
Now, Iras, what think’st thou? Thou an Egyptian puppet shalt be shown In Rome, as well as I. Mechanic slaves With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths, Rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded, And forced to drink their vapor.
The gods forbid!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, ’tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers Ballad us out o’ tune. The quick comedians Extemporally will stage us and present Our Alexandrian revels. Antony Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness I’ th’ posture of a whore.
Oh, the good gods!
Nay, that’s certain.
I’ll never see ’t! For I am sure mine nailsAre stronger than mine eyes.
Why, that’s the wayTo fool their preparation and to conquerTheir most absurd intents.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Charmian! Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch My best attires. I am again for Cydnus, To meet Mark Antony. —Sirrah Iras, go.— Now, noble Charmian, we’ll dispatch indeed, And when thou hast done this chare I’ll give thee leave To play till doomsday. [To IRAS] Bring our crown and all.
Wherefore’s this noise?
Here is a rural fellowThat will not be denied your Highness’ presence.He brings you figs.
Let him come in.
What poor an instrument May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty. My resolution’s placed, and I have nothing Of woman in me. Now from head to foot I am marble-constant. Now the fleeting moon No planet is of mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is the man.
Avoid, and leave him.
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,That kills and pains not?
Truly, I have him, but I would not be the party that should desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal. Those that do die of it do seldom or never recover.
Remember’st thou any that have died on ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them nolonger than yesterday—a very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty —how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt. Truly, she makes a very good report o’ th’ worm. But he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half that they do. But this is most falliable, the worm’s an odd worm.
Get thee hence, farewell.
I wish you all joy of the worm.
Farewell.
You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, ay. Farewell.
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.
Take thou no care. It shall be heeded.
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil himself will not eat a woman. I know that a woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great harmin their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone. Farewell.
Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o’ th’ worm.
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I haveImmortal longings in me. Now no moreThe juice of Egypt’s grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras, quick. Methinks I hear Antony call. I see him rouse himself To praise my noble act. I hear him mock The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men To excuse their after wrath. —Husband, I come! Now to that name my courage prove my title! I am fire and air, my other elements I give to baser life. —So, have you done? Come then and take the last warmth of my lips. Farewell, kind Charmian. Iras, long farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall? If thou and nature can so gently part, The stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch, Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lie still? If thus thou vanishest, thou tell’st the world It is not worth leave-taking.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may sayThe gods themselves do weep!
This proves me base. If she first meet the curlèd Antony, He’ll make demand of her and spend that kiss Which is my heaven to have. —Come, thou mortal wretch,
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool Be angry and dispatch. Oh, couldst thou speak, That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass Unpolicied!
O eastern star!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, peace!Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,That sucks the nurse asleep?
Oh, break! Oh, break!
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle—O Antony!—Nay, I will take thee too.
What should I stay—
In this wild world? So, fare thee well.Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession liesA lass unparalleled. Downy windows, close,
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And golden Phoebus never be beheldOf eyes again so royal! Your crown’s awry.I’ll mend it and then play—
Where’s the Queen?
Speak softly. Wake her not.
Caesar hath sent—
Too slow a messenger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.
[calling] Approach, ho! All’s not well. Caesar’s beguiled.
There’s Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.
What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?
It is well done and fitting for a princessDescended of so many royal kings.Ah, soldier!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming To see performed the dreaded act which thou So sought’st to hinder.
A way there, a way for Caesar!
O sir, you are too sure an augurer.That you did fear is done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bravest at the last, She leveled at our purposes and, being royal, Took her own way. The manner of their deaths? I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple countryman that brought her figs.This was his basket.
Poisoned, then.
Oh, Caesar, This Charmian lived but now. She stood and spake. I found her trimming up the diadem On her dead mistress. Tremblingly she stood And on the sudden dropped.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, noble weakness! If they had swallowed poison, ’twould appear By external swelling, but she looks like sleep, As she would catch another Antony In her strong toil of grace.
Here on her breastThere is a vent of blood, and something blown.The like is on her arm.
This is an aspic’s trail, and these fig leavesHave slime upon them, such as th’ aspic leavesUpon the caves of Nile.
Most probable That so she died, for her physician tells me She hath pursued conclusions infinite Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed And bear her women from the monument. She shall be buried by her Antony. No grave upon the earth shall clip in it A pair so famous. High events as these Strike those that make them, and their story is No less in pity than his glory which Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall In solemn show attend this funeral, And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see High order in this great solemnity.
As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayest, charged my brother on his blessing to breed me well. And there begins my sadness. My brother Jacques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he keeps me rustically at home or, to speak more properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that “keeping” for a gentleman of my birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that end, riders dearly hired. But I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from me. He lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me, and the spirit of my father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yonder comes my master, your brother.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.
Now, sir, what make you here?
Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.
What mar you then, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.
Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them? What prodigal portion have I spent that I should come to suchpenury?
Know you where you are, sir?
O sir, very well: here in your orchard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know you before whom, sir?
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me. The courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that you are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as much of my father in me as you, albeit, I confess, your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.
What, boy! [strikes him]
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this. [seizes him]
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains. Wert thou not mybrother, I would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so.Thou hast railed on thyself.
Sweet masters, be patient. For your father’s remembrance, be at accord.
Let me go, I say.
I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My father charged you in his will to give me good education. You have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament. With that I will go buy my fortunes.
And what wilt thou do—beg when that is spent? Well, sir, get you in. I will not long be troubled with you. You shall have some part of your will. I pray you leave me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Is “old dog” my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in your service. God be with my old master. He would not have spoke such a word.
Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I will physicyour rankness and yet give no thousand crowns neither.—Holla, Dennis!
Calls your Worship?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was not Charles, the duke’s wrestler, here to speak with me?
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.
Call him in.
'Twill be a good way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.
Good morrow to your Worship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Monsieur Charles, what’s the new news at the new court?
There’s no news at the court, sir, but the old news. That is, the old duke is banished by his younger brotherthe new duke, and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke. Therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind, the duke’s daughter, be banished with her father?
Oh, no, for the duke’s daughter her cousin so loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have followed her exile or have died to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved as they do.
Where will the old duke live?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England. They say many young gentlemenflock to him every day and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke?
Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall. Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well. Your brother is but young and tender, and, for your love I would be loath to foil him, as I must for my own honor if he comein. Therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him fromhis intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had myself notice of my brother’s purpose herein and have by underhand means labored to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I’ll tell thee, Charles: it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of ambition, anenvious emulator of every man’s good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to’t, for if thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee, he will practice against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other. For I assure thee—and almost with tears I speak it—there is not one so young and so villainous this day living. I speak but brotherlyof him, but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come tomorrow, I’ll give him his payment. If ever he go aloneagain, I’ll never wrestle for prize more. And so God keep your Worship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, good Charles.
Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall see an end of him, for my soul—yet I know not why—hates nothingmore than he. Yet he’s gentle, never schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all sorts enchantinglybeloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world and especially of my own people, who best know him, thatI am altogether misprized. But it shall not be so long;this wrestler shall clear all. Nothing remains but thatI kindle the boy thither, which now I’ll go about.
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of, and would you yet I were merrier? Unless you could teachme to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
Herein I see thou lov’st me not with the full weight that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught my love to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours.
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to have, and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee again in affection. By minehonor I will, and when I break that oath, let me turn monster. Therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let mesee—what think you of falling in love?
Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal, but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst in honor come off again.
What shall be our sport, then?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from herwheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
I would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and those that she makes honest she makes very ill- favoredly.
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune’s office to Nature’s.Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments ofNature.
No? When Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when Fortune makes Nature’s natural the cutter-off of Nature’s wit.
Peradventure this is not Fortune’s work neither, but Nature’s, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent this natural forour whetstone, for always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How now, wit, whither wander you?
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
Were you made the messenger?
No, by mine honor, but I was bid to come for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where learned you that oath, fool?
Of a certain knight that swore by his honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his honor the mustard was naught. Now, I’ll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins and swear by your beards that I am a knave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By our beards (if we had them), thou art.
By my knavery (if I had it), then I were. But if you swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn. No morewas this knight swearing by his honor, for he never hadany; or if he had, he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.
Prithee, who is ’t that thou mean’st?
One that old Frederick, your father, loves.
My father’s love is enough to honor him. Enough. Speak no more of him; you’ll be whipped for taxation one of these days.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wisemen do foolishly.
By my troth, thou sayest true. For, since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show. Here comes Monsieur Le Beau.
With his mouth full of news.
Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.
Then shall we be news-crammed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All the better. We shall be the more marketable.—Bonjour,Monsieur Le Beau. What’s the news?
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
Sport? Of what color?
What color, madam? How shall I answer you?
As wit and fortune will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or as the Destinies decrees.
Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.
Nay, if I keep not my rank—
Thou losest thy old smell.
You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You tell us the manner of the wrestling.
I will tell you the beginning, and if it please your Ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man and his three sons—
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Three proper young men of excellent growth and presence.
With bills on their necks: “Be it known unto all men bythese presents.”
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the duke’s wrestler, which Charles in a moment threw him andbroke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. So he served the second, and so the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man their father making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
Alas!
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first timethat ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else longs to see this broken music inhis sides? Is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?
You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.
Come on. Since the youth will not be entreated, his ownperil on his forwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, madam.
Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, daughter and cousin? Are you crept hither to see the wrestling?
Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you, there is such odds in the man. In pity of the challenger’s youth, I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if you can move him.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
Do so. I’ll not be by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Monsieur the challenger, the Princess calls for you.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?
No, fair princess. He is the general challenger. I comebut in as others do, to try with him the strength of myyouth.
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years. You have seen cruel proof of this man’s strength. If you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do, young sir. Your reputation shall not therefore be misprized. We will make it our suit to the duke that thewrestling might not go forward.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial, wherein, if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that was willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing. Only in the world I fill up a place which may be better supplied when I have made it empty.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
And mine, to eke out hers.
Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceived in you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your heart’s desires be with you.
Come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth?
Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.
You shall try but one fall.
No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat him to asecond, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You mean to mock me after, you should not have mocked me before. But come your ways.
Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow bythe leg.
O excellent young man!
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more, no more.
Yes, I beseech your Grace. I am not yet well breathed.
How dost thou, Charles?
He cannot speak, my lord.
Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir Rowland deBoys.
I would thou hadst been son to some man else. The world esteemed thy father honorable, But I did find him still mine enemy. Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed Hadst thou descended from another house. But fare thee well. Thou art a gallant youth. I would thou hadst told me of another father.
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland’s son,His youngest son, and would not change that calling To be adopted heir to Frederick.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul, And all the world was of my father’s mind. Had I before known this young man his son, I should have given him tears unto entreaties Ere he should thus have ventured.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentle cousin, Let us go thank him and encourage him. My father’s rough and envious disposition Sticks me at heart.— Sir, you have well deserved. If you do keep your promises in love But justly, as you have exceeded all promise, Your mistress shall be happy.
Gentleman, [giving him a chain from her neck] Wear this for me—one out of suits with fortune That could give more but that her hand lacks means. —Shall we go, coz?
Ay.—Fare you well, fair gentleman.
Can I not say “I thank you?” My better parts Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes. I’ll ask him what he would.— Did you call, sir? Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown More than your enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you go, coz?
Have with you. Fare you well.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference. O poor Orlando! Thou art overthrown. Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved High commendation, true applause, and love, Yet such is now the duke’s condition That he misconsters all that you have done. The duke is humorous. What he is indeed More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
I thank you, sir, and pray you tell me this:Which of the two was daughter of the dukeThat here was at the wrestling?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners, But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter The other is daughter to the banished duke, And here detained by her usurping uncle To keep his daughter company, whose loves Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters. But I can tell you that of late this duke Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece, Grounded upon no other argument But that the people praise her for her virtues And pity her for her good father’s sake; And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well. Hereafter, in a better world than this, I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you. Fare you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother, From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.But heavenly Rosalind!
Why, cousin! Why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy, not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs. Throw some of them at me. Come, lame me with reasons.
Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any.
But is all this for your father?
No, some of it is for my child’s father. Oh, how full of briers is this working-day world!
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery. If we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I could shake them off my coat. These burs are in my heart.
Hem them away.
I would try, if I could cry “hem” and have him.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
Oh, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, a good wish upon you. You will try in time, in despite of a fall. But turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest. Is it possible on such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking with old Sir Rowland’s youngest son?
The duke my father loved his father dearly.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? By this kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly. Yet I hate not Orlando.
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me love him for that, and do you love him because I do.Look, here comes the duke.
With his eyes full of anger.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,And get you from our court.
Me, uncle?
You, cousin. Within these ten days if that thou beest found So near our public court as twenty miles, Thou diest for it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech your Grace, Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me. If with myself I hold intelligence Or have acquaintance with mine own desires, If that I do not dream or be not frantic— As I do trust I am not—then, dear uncle, Never so much as in a thought unborn Did I offend your Highness.
Thus do all traitors. If their purgation did consist in words, They are as innocent as grace itself. Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Thou art thy father’s daughter. There’s enough.
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom. So was I when your Highness banished him. Treason is not inherited, my lord, Or if we did derive it from our friends, What’s that to me? My father was no traitor. Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much To think my poverty is treacherous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake.Else had she with her father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay. It was your pleasure and your own remorse. I was too young that time to value her, But now I know her. If she be a traitor, Why so am I. We still have slept together, Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together, And, wheresoe'er we went, like Juno’s swans Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness, Her very silence and her patience Speak to the people, and they pity her. Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name, And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous When she is gone. Then open not thy lips. Firm and irrevocable is my doom Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege. I cannot live out of her company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are a fool.—You, niece, provide yourself.If you outstay the time, upon mine honorAnd in the greatness of my word, you die.
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go? Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not, cousin.Prithee, be cheerful. Know’st thou not the dukeHath banished me, his daughter?
That he hath not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one. Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl? No, let my father seek another heir. Therefore devise with me how we may fly, Whither to go, and what to bear with us, And do not seek to take your change upon you, To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out. For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale, Say what thou canst, I’ll go along with thee.
Why, whither shall we go?
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
I’ll put myself in poor and mean attire And with a kind of umber smirch my face. The like do you. So shall we pass along And never stir assailants.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Were it not better, Because that I am more than common tall, That I did suit me all points like a man? A gallant curtal-axe upon my thigh, A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart Lie there what hidden woman’s fear there will, We’ll have a swashing and a martial outside— As many other mannish cowards have That do outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
I’ll have no worse a name than Jove’s own page,And therefore look you call me Ganymede. But what will you be called?
Something that hath a reference to my state:No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But, cousin, what if we assayed to stealThe clownish fool out of your father’s court? Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’ll go along o'er the wide world with me. Leave me alone to woo him. Let’s away And get our jewels and our wealth together, Devise the fittest time and safest way To hide us from pursuit that will be made After my flight. Now go we in content To liberty, and not to banishment.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, Hath not old custom made this life more sweet Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods More free from peril than the envious court? Here feel we not the penalty of Adam, The seasons' difference, as the icy fang And churlish chiding of the winter’s wind, Which, when it bites and blows upon my body, Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say, “This is no flattery. These are counselors That feelingly persuade me what I am.” Sweet are the uses of adversity, Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, Wears yet a precious jewel in his head. And this our life, exempt from public haunt, Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
I would not change it. Happy is your Grace,That can translate the stubbornness of fortune Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison? And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools, Being native burghers of this desert city, Should in their own confines with forkèd heads Have their round haunches gored.
Indeed, my lord, The melancholy Jaques grieves at that, And in that kind swears you do more usurp Than doth your brother that hath banished you. Today my Lord of Amiens and myself Did steal behind him as he lay along Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out Upon the brook that brawls along this wood, To the which place a poor sequestered stag That from the hunter’s aim had ta'en a hurt Did come to languish. And indeed, my lord, The wretched animal heaved forth such groans That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat Almost to bursting, and the big round tears Coursed one another down his innocent nose In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool, Much markèd of the melancholy Jaques, Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook, Augmenting it with tears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But what said Jaques?Did he not moralize this spectacle?
Oh, yes, into a thousand similes. First, for his weeping into the needless stream: “Poor deer,” quoth he, “thou mak’st a testament As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more To that which had too much.” Then, being there alone, Left and abandoned of his velvet friend, “'Tis right,” quoth he. “Thus misery doth part The flux of company.” Anon a careless herd, Full of the pasture, jumps along by him And never stays to greet him. “Ay,” quoth Jaques, “Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens. 'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?” Thus most invectively he pierceth through The body of the country, city, court, Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what’s worse, To fright the animals and to kill them up In their assigned and native dwelling place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did, my lord, weeping and commentingUpon the sobbing deer.
Show me the place.I love to cope him in these sullen fits,For then he’s full of matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll bring you to him straight.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?It cannot be. Some villains of my courtAre of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her. The ladies, her attendants of her chamber Saw her abed, and in the morning early They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, the roinish clown, at whom so oft Your Grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman, Confesses that she secretly o'erheard Your daughter and her cousin much commend The parts and graces of the wrestler That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles, And she believes wherever they are gone That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither. If he be absent, bring his brother to me. I’ll make him find him. Do this suddenly, And let not search and inquisition quail To bring again these foolish runaways.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s there?
What, my young master, O my gentle master, O my sweet master, O you memory Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here? Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you? And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant? Why would you be so fond to overcome The bonny prizer of the humorous duke? Your praise is come too swiftly home before you. Know you not, master, to some kind of men Their graces serve them but as enemies? No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master, Are sanctified and holy traitors to you. Oh, what a world is this when what is comely Envenoms him that bears it!
Why, what’s the matter?
O unhappy youth, Come not within these doors. Within this roof The enemy of all your graces lives. Your brother—no, no brother—yet the son— Yet not the son, I will not call him son— Of him I was about to call his father Hath heard your praises, and this night he means To burn the lodging where you use to lie, And you within it. If he fail of that, He will have other means to cut you off. I overheard him and his practices. This is no place, this house is but a butchery. Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No matter whither, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food, Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce A thievish living on the common road? This I must do, or know not what to do. Yet this I will not do, do how I can. I rather will subject me to the malice Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns, The thrifty hire I saved under your father, Which I did store to be my foster nurse When service should in my old limbs lie lame And unregarded age in corners thrown. Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed, Yea, providently caters for the sparrow, Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold. All this I give you. Let me be your servant. Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty, For in my youth I never did apply Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo The means of weakness and debility. Therefore my age is as a lusty winter, Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you. I’ll do the service of a younger man In all your business and necessities.
O good old man, how well in thee appears The constant service of the antique world, When service sweat for duty, not for meed. Thou art not for the fashion of these times, Where none will sweat but for promotion, And having that do choke their service up Even with the having. It is not so with thee. But, poor old man, thou prun’st a rotten tree That cannot so much as a blossom yield In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry. But come thy ways. We’ll go along together, And ere we have thy youthful wages spent, We’ll light upon some settled low content.
Master, go on, and I will follow thee To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. From seventeen years till now almost fourscore Here livèd I, but now live here no more. At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek, But at fourscore, it is too late a week. Yet fortune cannot recompense me better Than to die well, and not my master’s debtor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man’s apparel and to cry like a woman, but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. Therefore courage, good Aliena.
I pray you bear with me. I cannot go no further.
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you. Yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I. When I was at homeI was in a better place, but travelers must be content.
Ay, be so, good Touchstone.
Look you who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Corin, that thou knew’st how I do love her!
I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess, Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow. But if thy love were ever like to mine— As sure I think did never man love so— How many actions most ridiculous Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
Oh, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily. If thou rememb’rest not the slightest folly That ever love did make thee run into, Thou hast not loved. Or if thou hast not sat as I do now, Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress’s praise, Thou hast not loved. Or if thou hast not broke from company Abruptly, as my passion now makes me, Thou hast not loved. O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound, I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And I mine. I remember when I was in love I broke my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for coming a- night to Jane Smile. And I remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow’s dugs that her pretty chapped handshad milked. And I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took two cods and, giving her them again, said with weeping tears, “Wear these formy sake.” We that are true lovers run into strange capers. But as all is mortal in nature, so is all naturein love mortal in folly.
Thou speak’st wiser than thou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I breakmy shins against it.
Jove, Jove, this shepherd’s passionIs much upon my fashion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And mine, but it grows something stale with me.
I pray you, one of you question yond man, if he for gold will give us any food. I faint almost to death.
[to CORIN] Holla, you clown!
Peace, fool. He’s not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your betters, sir.
Else are they very wretched.
Peace, I say. —Good even to you, friend.
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold Can in this desert place buy entertainment, Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed. Here’s a young maid with travel much oppressed, And faints for succor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fair sir, I pity her And wish, for her sake more than for mine own, My fortunes were more able to relieve her. But I am shepherd to another man And do not shear the fleeces that I graze. My master is of churlish disposition And little recks to find the way to heaven By doing deeds of hospitality. Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now, By reason of his absence, there is nothing That you will feed on. But what is, come see, And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile, That little cares for buying anything.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place, And willingly could waste my time in it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Assuredly the thing is to be sold. Go with me. If you like upon report The soil, the profit, and this kind of life, I will your very faithful feeder be And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
[sings] Under the greenwood tree Who loves to lie with me And turn his merry note Unto the sweet bird’s throat, Come hither, come hither, come hither. Here shall he see No enemy But winter and rough weather.
More, more, I prithee, more.
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs. More, Iprithee, more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you.
I do not desire you to please me. I do desire you to sing. Come, more, another stanzo. Call you 'em “stanzos?”
What you will, Monsieur Jaques.
Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me nothing. Will you sing?
More at your request than to please myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well then, if ever I thank any man, I’ll thank you. But that they call “compliment” is like th' encounter oftwo dog-apes. And when a man thanks me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing. And you that will not, holdyour tongues.
Well, I’ll end the song.—Sirs, cover the while; the duke will drink under this tree.—He hath been all this day to look you.
And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is too disputable for my company. I think of as many matters ashe, but I give heaven thanks and make no boast of them.Come, warble, come.
[singing] Who doth ambition shun And loves to live i' th' sun, Seeking the food he eats And pleased with what he gets, Come hither, come hither, come hither. Here shall he see No enemy But winter and rough weather.
I’ll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of my invention.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I’ll sing it. [taking paper from JAQUES] Thus it goes: If it do come to pass That any man turn ass, Leaving his wealth and ease A stubborn will to please, Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame. Here shall he see Gross fools as he, An if he will come to me.
What’s that “ducdame”?
'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. I’ll go sleep if I can. If I cannot, I’ll rail against all the first-born of Egypt.
And I’ll go seek the duke. His banquet is prepared.
Dear master, I can go no further. Oh, I die for food. Here lieI down and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in thee? Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth forest yield anything savage, I will eitherbe food for it or bring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my sake, becomfortable. Hold death awhile at the arm’s end. I willhere be with thee presently, and if I bring thee not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die. But if thou diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labor.Well said. Thou look’st cheerly, and I’ll be with thee quickly. Yet thou liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if there live anything in this desert. Cheerly, good Adam.
I think he be transformed into a beast,For I can nowhere find him like a man.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence.Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.Go seek him. Tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labor by his own approach.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this That your poor friends must woo your company?What, you look merrily.
A fool, a fool, I met a fool i' th' forest, A motley fool. A miserable world! As I do live by food, I met a fool, Who laid him down and basked him in the sun And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms, In good set terms, and yet a motley fool. “Good morrow, fool,” quoth I. “No, sir,” quoth he, “Call me not ‘fool’ till heaven hath sent me fortune.” And then he drew a dial from his poke And, looking on it with lackluster eye, Says very wisely, “It is ten o'clock. Thus we may see,” quoth he, “how the world wags. 'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine, And after one hour more ’twill be eleven. And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe, And then from hour to hour we rot and rot, And thereby hangs a tale.” When I did hear The motley fool thus moral on the time, My lungs began to crow like chanticleer That fools should be so deep-contemplative, And I did laugh sans intermission An hour by his dial. O noble fool! A worthy fool! Motley’s the only wear.
What fool is this?
O worthy fool!— One that hath been a courtier And says, “If ladies be but young and fair, They have the gift to know it.” And in his brain, Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed With observation, the which he vents In mangled forms. Oh, that I were a fool! I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is my only suit, Provided that you weed your better judgments Of all opinion that grows rank in them That I am wise. I must have liberty Withal, as large a charter as the wind, To blow on whom I please, for so fools have. And they that are most gallèd with my folly, They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so? The “why” is plain as way to parish church: He that a fool doth very wisely hit Doth very foolishly, although he smart, Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not, The wise man’s folly is anatomized Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool. Invest me in my motley. Give me leave To speak my mind, and I will through and through Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world, If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin, For thou thyself hast been a libertine, As sensual as the brutish sting itself, And all th' embossèd sores and headed evils That thou with license of free foot hast caught Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
Why, who cries out on pride That can therein tax any private party? Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea Till that the weary very means do ebb? What woman in the city do I name, When that I say the city-woman bears The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders? Who can come in and say that I mean her, When such a one as she such is her neighbor? Or what is he of basest function That says his bravery is not of my cost, Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits His folly to the mettle of my speech? There then. How then, what then? Let me see wherein My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right, Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free, Why then my taxing like a wild goose flies Unclaimed of any man. But who comes here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Forbear, and eat no more.
Why, I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not till necessity be served.
Of what kind should this cock come of?
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distressOr else a rude despiser of good manners,That in civility thou seem’st so empty?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You touched my vein at first. The thorny point Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show Of smooth civility, yet am I inland bred And know some nurture. But forbear, I say. He dies that touches any of this fruit Till I and my affairs are answerèd.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall forceMore than your force move us to gentleness.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you. I thought that all things had been savage here, And therefore put I on the countenance Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are That in this desert inaccessible, Under the shade of melancholy boughs, Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time, If ever you have looked on better days, If ever been where bells have knolled to church, If ever sat at any good man’s feast, If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear And know what ’tis to pity and be pitied, Let gentleness my strong enforcement be, In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.
True is it that we have seen better days And have with holy bell been knolled to church, And sat at good men’s feasts and wiped our eyes Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered. And therefore sit you down in gentleness, And take upon command what help we have That to your wanting may be ministered.
Then but forbear your food a little while Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn And give it food. There is an old poor man Who after me hath many a weary step Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed, Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger, I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out,And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank you; and be blessed for your good comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy. This wide and universal theater Presents more woeful pageants than the scene Wherein we play in.
All the world’s a stage, And all the men and women merely players. They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages. At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms. Then the whining schoolboy with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances; And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slippered pantaloon With spectacles on nose and pouch on side, His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burden,And let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need.— I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Welcome. Fall to. I will not trouble youAs yet to question you about your fortunes.—Give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.
[sings] Blow, blow, thou winter wind. Thou art not so unkind As man’s ingratitude. Thy tooth is not so keen, Because thou art not seen, Although thy breath be rude. Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly. Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly. Then heigh-ho, the holly. This life is most jolly. Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky, That dost not bite so nigh As benefits forgot. Though thou the waters warp, Thy sting is not so sharp As friend remembered not. Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly. Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly. Then heigh-ho, the holly. This life is most jolly.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland’s son, As you have whispered faithfully you were, And as mine eye doth his effigies witness Most truly limned and living in your face, Be truly welcome hither. I am the duke That loved your father. The residue of your fortune Go to my cave and tell me.— Good old man, Thou art right welcome as thy master is. Support him by the arm. Give me your hand, And let me all your fortunes understand.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be. But were I not the better part made mercy, I should not seek an absent argument Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it: Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is. Seek him with candle. Bring him, dead or living, Within this twelvemonth or turn thou no more To seek a living in our territory. Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother’s mouth Of what we think against thee.
Oh, that your Highness knew my heart in this:I never loved my brother in my life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]More villain thou.— Well, push him out of doors And let my officers of such a nature Make an extent upon his house and lands. Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love. And thou, thrice-crownéd queen of night, survey With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway. O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books, And in their barks my thoughts I’ll character, That every eye which in this forest looks Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere. Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
And how like you this shepherd’s life, Master Touchstone?
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd’s life, it isnaught. In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well; but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect it is not in the court,it is tedious. As it is a spare life, look you, it fitsmy humor well; but as there is no more plenty in it, itgoes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
No more but that I know the more one sickens, the worseat ease he is, and that he that wants money, means, andcontent is without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in court, shepherd?
No, truly.
Then thou art damned.
Nay, I hope.
Truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted egg, all onone side.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For not being at court? Your reason.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never saw’st good manners; if thou never saw’st good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous state, shepherd.
Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners atthe court are as ridiculous in the country as the behavior of the country is most mockable at the court. You told me you salute not at the court but you kiss yourhands. That courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.
Instance, briefly. Come, instance.
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are greasy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, do not your courtier’s hands sweat? And is not thegrease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow. A better instance, I say. Come.
Besides, our hands are hard.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again. A more sounder instance. Come.
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? The courtier’s hands are perfumed with civet.
Most shallow man. Thou worms' meat in respect of a goodpiece of flesh, indeed. Learn of the wise and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have too courtly a wit for me. I’ll rest.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man. God make incision in thee; thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true laborer. I earn that I eat, get that Iwear, owe no man hate, envy no man’s happiness, glad ofother men’s good, content with my harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get your living bythe copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bellwether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram, out of all reasonable match. If thou be’st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds. I cannot see else how thou shouldst ’scape.
Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress’s brother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as Ganymede, reading] From the east to western Ind, No jewel is like Rosalind. Her worth being mounted on the wind, Through all the world bears Rosalind. All the pictures fairest lined Are but black to Rosalind. Let no fair be kept in mind But the fair of Rosalind.
I’ll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted. It is the right butter-women’s rank to market.
Out, fool.
For a taste: If a hart do lack a hind, Let him seek out Rosalind. If the cat will after kind, So, be sure, will Rosalind. Winter garments must be lined, So must slender Rosalind. They that reap must sheaf and bind, Then to cart with Rosalind. Sweetest nut hath sourest rind; Such a nut is Rosalind. He that sweetest rose will find Must find love’s prick, and Rosalind. This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you infect yourself with them?
Peace, you dull fool. I found them on a tree.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
I’ll graft it with you, and then I shall graft it with a medlar. Then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country, for you’ll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that’s the right virtue of the medlar.
You have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.
Peace. Here comes my sister reading. Stand aside.
[as Aliena, reads] Why should this a desert be? For it is unpeopled? No. Tongues I’ll hang on every tree That shall civil sayings show. Some how brief the life of man Runs his erring pilgrimage, That the stretching of a span Buckles in his sum of age; Some of violated vows 'Twixt the souls of friend and friend. But upon the fairest boughs, Or at every sentence end, Will I “Rosalinda” write, Teaching all that read to know The quintessence of every sprite Heaven would in little show. Therefore heaven nature charged That one body should be filled With all graces wide-enlarged. Nature presently distilled Helen’s cheek, but not her heart, Cleopatra’s majesty, Atalanta’s better part, Sad Lucretia’s modesty. Thus Rosalind of many parts By heavenly synod was devised, Of many faces, eyes, and hearts To have the touches dearest prized. Heaven would that she these gifts should have And I to live and die her slave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O most gentle Jupiter, what tedious homily of love haveyou wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried, “Have patience, good people.”
[as Aliena] How now?—Back, friends.—Shepherd, go off a little.—Go with him, sirrah.
Come, shepherd, let us make an honorable retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
Didst thou hear these verses?
Oh, yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s no matter. The feet might bear the verses.
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the verse, and therefore stood lamelyin the verse.
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came, for look here what I found on a palm tree. I was never so berhymed since Pythagoras' time, that I wasan Irish rat, which I can hardly remember.
Trow you who hath done this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it a man?
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. Changeyou color?
I prithee, who?
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it possible?
Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!
Good my complexion, dost thou think though I am caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay more is a South Sea of discovery. I prithee, tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst stammer, that thou might’st pour this concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle— either too much at once, or none at all. I prithee take the cork out of thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings.
So you may put a man in your belly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is he of God’s making? What manner of man? Is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why, God will send more, if the man will be thankful. Let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler’s heels and your heart both in an instant.
Nay, but the devil take mocking. Speak sad brow and true maid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' faith, coz, ’tis he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet and hose? What did he when thou saw’st him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes him here? Didhe ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him again? Answer me in one word.
You must borrow me Gargantua’s mouth first. 'Tis a word too great for any mouth of this age’s size. To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to answer ina catechism.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But doth he know that I am in this forest and in man’s apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a lover. But take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. I found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.
It may well be called Jove’s tree when it drops forth such fruit.
Give me audience, good madam.
Proceed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There lay he, stretched along like a wounded knight.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomesthe ground.
Cry “holla” to thy tongue, I prithee. It curvets unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.
Oh, ominous! He comes to kill my heart.
I would sing my song without a burden. Thou bring’st me out of tune.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you not know I am a woman? When I think, I must speak. Sweet, say on.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?
'Tis he. Slink by, and note him.
I thank you for your company, but, good faith, I had aslief have been myself alone.
And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for your society.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God be wi' you. Let’s meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs intheir barks.
I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill- favoredly.
Rosalind is your love’s name?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, just.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.
What stature is she of?
Just as high as my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives and conned them out ofrings?
Not so. But I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.
You have a nimble wit. I think ’twas made of Atalanta’sheels. Will you sit down with me? And we two will rail against our mistress the world and all our misery.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom I know most faults.
The worst fault you have is to be in love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue. I am weary of you.
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found you.
He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and you shall see him.
There I shall see mine own figure.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll tarry no longer with you. Farewell, good Signior Love.
I am glad of your departure. Adieu, good MonsieurMelancholy.
[aside to CELIA] I will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave with him.—Doyou hear, forester?
Very well. What would you?
[As Ganymede) I pray you, what is ’t o'clock?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You should ask me what time o' day. There’s no clock in the forest.
Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighingevery minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a clock.
And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that been as proper?
By no means, sir. Time travels in diverse paces with diverse persons. I’ll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her marriage and the day it is solemnized. If the interim be but a se'nnight, time’s pace is so hardthat it seems the length of seven year.
Who ambles time withal?
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that hathnot the gout, for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain— the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. These time ambles withal.
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as softlyas foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who stays it still withal?
With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between term and term, and then they perceive not how time moves.
Where dwell you, pretty youth?
With this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest like fringe upon a petticoat.
Are you native of this place?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Your accent is something finer than you could purchasein so removed a dwelling.
I have been told so of many. But indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard him read many lectures against it, and I thank God I am not a woman, to be touched with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of women?
There were none principal. They were all like one another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee, recount some of them.
No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick. There is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving “Rosalind” on their barks,hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on brambles, all,forsooth, deifying the name of Rosalind. If I could meet that fancy-monger I would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love uponhim.
I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you tell me yourremedy.
There is none of my uncle’s marks upon you. He taught me how to know a man in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.
What were his marks?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected, which you have not— but I pardon you for that, for simply your having inbeard is a younger brother’s revenue. Then your hose should be ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation. But you are no suchman. You are rather point-device in your accouterments,as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you love believe it, which I warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does. That is one of the points in the whichwomen still give the lie to their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees wherein Rosalind is so admired?
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind,I am that he, that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Love is merely a madness and, I tell you, deserves as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do, and the reason why they are not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in love,too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me hislove, his mistress, and I set him every day to woo me; at which time would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every passion something, and for no passion truly anything, as boys and women are, for the most part, cattle of this color; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him, that I drave mysuitor from his mad humor of love to a living humor of madness, which was to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook merely monastic. And thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me to wash yourliver as clean as a sound sheep’s heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in ’t.
I would not be cured, youth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would cure you if you would but call me Rosalind and come every day to my cote and woo me.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is.
Go with me to it, and I’ll show it you; and by the wayyou shall tell me where in the forest you live. Will you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind.—Come, sister, will you go?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up your goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? Am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature content you?
Your features, Lord warrant us! What features?
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
[aside] O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in athatched house.
When a man’s verses cannot be understood nor a man’s good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would the gods had made thee poetical.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not know what “poetical” is. Is it honest in deed and word? Is it a true thing?
No, truly, for the truest poetry is the most feigning,and lovers are given to poetry, and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.
Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?
I do, truly, for thou swear’st to me thou art honest. Now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.
Would you not have me honest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favored, for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.
[aside] A material fool.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the gods makeme honest.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness; sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may be,I will marry thee; and to that end I have been with SirOliver Martext, the vicar of the next village, who hathpromised to meet me in this place of the forest and to couple us.
[aside] I would fain see this meeting.
Well, the gods give us joy.
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, staggerin this attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts. But what though? Courage. As horns are odious, they are necessary. It is said, “Many a man knows no end of his goods.” Right: many a man has good horns and knows no end of them. Well, that is the dowry of his wife; ’tis none of his own getting. Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no.The noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man therefore blessed? No. As a walled town is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of amarried man more honorable than the bare brow of a bachelor. And by how much defense is better than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to want.
Here comes Sir Oliver.—Sir Oliver Martext, you are wellmet. Will you dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your chapel?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there none here to give the woman?
I will not take her on gift of any man.
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
[advancing] Proceed, proceed. I’ll give her.
Good even, good Monsieur What-ye-call’t. How do you, sir? You are very well met. God 'ild you for your last company. I am very glad to see you. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay, pray be covered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you be married, motley?
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
And will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to church, and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is. This fellow will but join you together as they join wainscot.Then one of you will prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.
[aside] I am not in the mind but I were better to be married of him than of another, for he is not like to marry me well, and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, sweet Audrey. We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.— Farewell, good Master Oliver, not O sweet Oliver, O brave Oliver, Leave me not behind thee But Wind away, Begone, I say, I will not to wedding with thee.
'Tis no matter. Ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.
Never talk to me. I will weep.
Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man.
But have I not cause to weep?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As good cause as one would desire. Therefore weep.
His very hair is of the dissembling color.
Something browner than Judas’s. Marry, his kisses areJudas’s own children.
I' faith, his hair is of a good color.
An excellent color. Your chestnut was ever the only color.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun of winter’s sisterhood kisses not more religiously. The very ice of chastity is in them.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
Do you think so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.
Not true in love?
Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.
You have heard him swear downright he was.
“Was” is not “is.” Besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster. They are both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends here in the forest on the duke your father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I met the duke yesterday and had much question with him. He asked me of what parentage I was. I told him, ofas good as he. So he laughed and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as Orlando?
Oh, that’s a brave man. He writes brave verses, speaksbrave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of his lover, as a puny tilter that spurs his horse but on one side breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all’s brave that youth mounts and folly guides.
Who comes here?
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired After the shepherd that complained of love, Who you saw sitting by me on the turf, Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess That was his mistress.
[As Aliena] Well, and what of him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you will see a pageant truly played Between the pale complexion of true love And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain, Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you, If you will mark it.
[aside to CELIA] O, come, let us remove.The sight of lovers feedeth those in love. [as Ganymede, to CORIN] Bring us to this sight, and youshall sayI’ll prove a busy actor in their play.
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe. Say that you love me not, but say not so In bitterness. The common executioner, Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard, Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner. I fly thee, for I would not injure thee. Thou tell’st me there is murder in mine eye. 'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable That eyes, that are the frail’st and softest things, Who shut their coward gates on atomies, Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers. Now I do frown on thee with all my heart, And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee. Now counterfeit to swoon, why, now fall down; Or if thou canst not, Oh, for shame, for shame, Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers. Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee. Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains Some scar of it. Lean upon a rush, The cicatrice and capable impressure Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes, Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not. Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes That can do hurt.
O dear Phoebe, If ever—as that ever may be near— You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy, Then shall you know the wounds invisible That love’s keen arrows make.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But till that time Come not thou near me. And when that time comes, Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not, As till that time I shall not pity thee.
[Advancing, as Ganymede] And why, I pray you? Who mightbe your mother, That you insult, exult, and all at once, Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty— As, by my faith, I see no more in you Than without candle may go dark to bed— Must you be therefore proud and pitiless? Why, what means this? Why do you look on me? I see no more in you than in the ordinary Of nature’s sale-work.— 'Od’s my little life, I think she means to tangle my eyes, too. —No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it. 'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair, Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream That can entame my spirits to your worship. —You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her, Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain? You are a thousand times a properer man Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you That makes the world full of ill-favored children. 'Tis not her glass but you that flatters her, And out of you she sees herself more proper Than any of her lineaments can show her. —But, mistress, know yourself. Down on your knees And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man’s love, For I must tell you friendly in your ear, Sell when you can; you are not for all markets. Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer. Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. —So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together.I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
He’s fall'n in love with your foulness. [to SILVIUS] And she’ll fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks, I’ll sauceher with bitter words. [to PHOEBE] Why look you so uponme?
For no ill will I bear you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you, do not fall in love with me, For I am falser than vows made in wine. Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house, 'Tis at the tuft of olives, here hard by. —Will you go, sister?— Shepherd, ply her hard. —Come, sister.— Shepherdess, look on him better, And be not proud. Though all the world could see, None could be so abused in sight as he. —Come, to our flock.
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:“Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?”
Sweet Phoebe—
Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?
Sweet Phoebe, pity me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be. If you do sorrow at my grief in love, By giving love your sorrow and my grief Were both extermined.
Thou hast my love. Is not that neighborly?
I would have you.
Why, that were covetousness. Silvius, the time was that I hated thee, And yet it is not that I bear thee love, But since that thou canst talk of love so well, Thy company, which erst was irksome to me, I will endure, and I’ll employ thee too. But do not look for further recompense Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So holy and so perfect is my love, And I in such a poverty of grace, That I shall think it a most plenteous crop To glean the broken ears after the man That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then A scattered smile, and that I’ll live upon.
Know’st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,And he hath bought the cottage and the boundsThat the old carlot once was master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him. 'Tis but a peevish boy—yet he talks well— But what care I for words? Yet words do well When he that speaks them pleases those that hear. It is a pretty youth—not very pretty— But sure he’s proud—and yet his pride becomes him. He’ll make a proper man. The best thing in him Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue Did make offense, his eye did heal it up. He is not very tall—yet for his years he’s tall. His leg is but so-so—and yet ’tis well. There was a pretty redness in his lip, A little riper and more lusty red Than that mixed in his cheek: ’twas just the difference Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask. There be some women, Silvius, had they marked him In parcels as I did, would have gone near To fall in love with him; but for my part I love him not nor hate him not; and yet I have more cause to hate him than to love him. For what had he to do to chide at me? He said mine eyes were black and my hair black And, now I am remembered, scorned at me. I marvel why I answered not again. But that’s all one: omittance is no quittance. I’ll write to him a very taunting letter, And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?
Phoebe, with all my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll write it straight. The matter’s in my head and in my heart. I will be bitter with him and passing short. Go with me, Silvius.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am so. I do love it better than laughing.
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, ’tis good to be sad and say nothing.
Why then, ’tis good to be a post.
I have neither the scholar’s melancholy, which is emulation; nor the musician’s, which is fantastical; northe courtier’s, which is proud; nor the soldier’s, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer’s, which is politic; nor the lady’s, which is nice; nor the lover’s, which isall these, but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness.
A traveler. By my faith, you have great reason to be sad. I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men’s. Then to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
Yes, I have gained my experience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And your experience makes you sad. I had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad—andto travel for it, too.
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind.
Nay then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveler. Look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.
[as Ganymede pretending to be ROSALIND] Why, how now, Orlando, where have you been all this while? You a lover? An you serve me such another trick, never come inmy sight more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Break an hour’s promise in love? He that will divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but a part of thethousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid hath clapped him o' th' shoulder, but I’ll warrant him heart-whole.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. I had as lief be wooed of a snail.
Of a snail?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head—a better jointure, I think, than you make a woman. Besides, he brings his destiny with him.
What’s that?
Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for. But he comes armed in his fortune andprevents the slander of his wife.
Virtue is no hornmaker, and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And I am your Rosalind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as Aliena] It pleases him to call you so, but he hath aRosalind of a better leer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday humor, and like enough to consent. What would you say to me now, an I were your very, very Rosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were graveled for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking—God warn us—matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
Marry, that should you if I were your mistress, or I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
What, of my suit?
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. Am not I your Rosalind?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I take some joy to say you are because I would be talking of her.
Well, in her person I say I will not have you.
Then, in mine own person I die.
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person, videlicet, in a lovecause. Troilus had his brains dashed out with a Grecianclub, yet he did what he could to die before, and he isone of the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair year though Hero had turned nun if it had not been for a hot midsummer night, for, good youth,he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and, being taken with the cramp, was drowned; and the foolishchroniclers of that age found it was Hero of Sestos. But these are all lies. Men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come; now I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, I will grant it.
Then love me, Rosalind.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.
And wilt thou have me?
Ay, and twenty such.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What sayest thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?— Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.—Giveme your hand, Orlando.—What do you say, sister?
Pray thee, marry us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot say the words.
You must begin “Will you, Orlando—”
Go to.—Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
I will.
Ay, but when?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, now, as fast as she can marry us.
Then you must say “I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.”
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
I might ask you for your commission, but I do take thee, Orlando, for my husband. There’s a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a woman’s thought runs before her actions.
So do all thoughts. They are winged.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.
Forever and a day.
Say “a day” without the “ever.” No, no, Orlando, men are April when they woo, December when they wed. Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cock- pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than aparrot against rain, more newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the fountain, and I will do that when you are disposed to be merry. I will laugh like a hyena, and that when thou art inclined to sleep.
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, but she is wise.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this. The wiser, the waywarder. Make the doors upon a woman’s wit,and it will out at the casement. Shut that, and ’twill out at the keyhole. Stop that, ’twill fly with the smokeout at the chimney.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say “Wit, whither wilt?”
Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wife’s wit going to your neighbor’s bed.
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall never take her without her answer unless you take her without her tongue. Oh, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband’s occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
I must attend the duke at dinner. By two o'clock I willbe with thee again.
Ay, go your ways, go your ways. I knew what you would prove. My friends told me as much, and I thought no less. That flattering tongue of yours won me. 'Tis but one cast away, and so, come, death. Two o'clock is your hour?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your promise or come one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most pathetical break-promise and the most hollow lover and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind that may be chosen outof the gross band of the unfaithful. Therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind.So, adieu.
Well, time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let time try. Adieu.
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate. We must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didstknow how many fathom deep I am in love. But it cannot be sounded; my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.
Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs out.
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot ofthought, conceived of spleen, and born of madness, thatblind rascally boy that abuses everyone’s eyes because his own are out, let him be judge how deep I am in love. I’ll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight ofOrlando. I’ll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.
And I’ll sleep.
Which is he that killed the deer?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, it was I.
Let’s present him to the duke like a Roman conqueror. And it would do well to set the deer’s horns upon his head for a branch of victory.—Have you no song, forester, for this purpose?
Yes, sir.
Sing it. 'Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.
[sings] What shall he have that killed the deer? His leather skin and horns to wear. Then sing him home. (The rest shall bear this burden.) Take thou no scorn to wear the horn. It was a crest ere thou wast born. Thy father’s father wore it, And thy father bore it. The horn, the horn, the lusty horn Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? And here much Orlando.
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.
Look who comes here.
[To ROSALIND] My errand is to you, fair youth. My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this. I know not the contents, but as I guess By the stern brow and waspish action Which she did use as she was writing of it, It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me. I am but as a guiltless messenger. [Gives the letter]
[Examines the letter as Ganymede] Patience herself would startle at this letter And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all. She says I am not fair, that I lack manners. She calls me proud, and that she could not love me Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od’s my will, Her love is not the hare that I do hunt. Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well, This is a letter of your own device.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I protest, I know not the contents.Phoebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool, And turned into the extremity of love. I saw her hand. She has a leathern hand, A freestone-colored hand. I verily did think That her old gloves were on, but ’twas her hands. She has a huswife’s hand—but that’s no matter. I say she never did invent this letter. This is a man’s invention, and his hand.
Sure it is hers.
Why, ’tis a boisterous and a cruel style, A style for challengers. Why, she defies me Like Turk to Christian. Women’s gentle brain Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention, Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet,Yet heard too much of Phoebe’s cruelty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes. [reads] Art thou god to shepherd turned, That a maiden’s heart hath burned? Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
[reads] Why, thy godhead laid apart, Warr’st thou with a woman’s heart? Did you ever hear such railing? Whiles the eye of man did woo me, That could do no vengeance to me. Meaning me a beast. If the scorn of your bright eyne Have power to raise such love in mine, Alack, in me what strange effect Would they work in mild aspect? Whiles you chid me, I did love. How then might your prayers move? He that brings this love to thee Little knows this love in me, And by him seal up thy mind Whether that thy youth and kind Will the faithful offer take Of me, and all that I can make, Or else by him my love deny, And then I’ll study how to die.
Call you this chiding?
[As Aliena] Alas, poor shepherd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity.— Wilt thou love such a woman? What, to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee? Not to be endured. Well, go your way to her, for I see love hath made thee a tamesnake, and say this to her: that if she love me, I charge her to love thee; if she will not, I will never have her unless thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover, hence and not a word, for here comes more company.
Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you, if you know, Where in the purlieus of this forest standsA sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?
[as Aliena] West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom, The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream Left on your right hand brings you to the place. But at this hour the house doth keep itself. There’s none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue, Then should I know you by description. Such garments, and such years. “The boy is fair, Of female favor, and bestows himself Like a ripe sister; the woman low And browner than her brother.” Are not you The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Orlando doth commend him to you both,And to that youth he calls his RosalindHe sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
[as Ganymede] I am. What must we understand by this?
Some of my shame, if you will know of me What man I am, and how, and why, and whereThis handkercher was stained.
I pray you, tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you, He left a promise to return again Within an hour, and pacing through the forest, Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy, Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside— And mark what object did present itself: Under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with age And high top bald with dry antiquity, A wretched, ragged man, o'ergrown with hair, Lay sleeping on his back. About his neck A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself, Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached The opening of his mouth. But suddenly, Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself And, with indented glides, did slip away Into a bush, under which bush’s shade A lioness, with udders all drawn dry, Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch When that the sleeping man should stir—for ’tis The royal disposition of that beast To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead. This seen, Orlando did approach the man And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, I have heard him speak of that same brother,And he did render him the most unnaturalThat lived amongst men.
And well he might so do,For well I know he was unnatural.
But to Orlando: did he leave him there, Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so, But kindness, nobler ever than revenge, And nature, stronger than his just occasion, Made him give battle to the lioness, Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling, From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was ’t you he rescued?
Was ’t you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
'Twas I, but ’tis not I. I do not shame To tell you what I was, since my conversionSo sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin?
By and by. When from the first to last betwixt us two Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed— As how I came into that desert place— In brief, he led me to the gentle duke, Who gave me fresh array and entertainment, Committing me unto my brother’s love, Who led me instantly unto his cave, There stripped himself, and here upon his arm The lioness had torn some flesh away, Which all this while had bled. And now he fainted, And cried in fainting upon Rosalind. Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound, And after some small space, being strong at heart, He sent me hither, stranger as I am, To tell this story, that you might excuse His broken promise, and to give this napkin Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede?
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it.—Cousin Ganymede.
Look, he recovers.
I would I were at home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We’ll lead you thither.—I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Be of good cheer, youth. You a man? You lack a man’s heart.
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well-counterfeited. I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho.
This was not counterfeit. There is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
So I do. But i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.
Come, you look paler and paler. Pray you, draw homewards.—Good sir, go with us.
That will I, for I must bear answer backHow you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall devise something. But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We shall find a time, Audrey. Patience, gentle Audrey.
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman’s saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext.But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.
Ay, I know who ’tis. He hath no interest in me in the world.
Here comes the man you mean.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is meat and drink to me to see a clown. By my troth, we that have good wits have much to answer for. We shall be flouting. We cannot hold.
Good ev'n, Audrey.
God gi' good ev'n, William.
And good ev'n to you, sir.
Good ev'n, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head.Nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Five-and-twenty, sir.
A ripe age. Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name. Wast born i' th' forest here?
Ay, sir, I thank God.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“Thank God.” A good answer. Art rich?
'Faith, sir, so-so.
“So-so” is good, very good, very excellent good. And yet it is not: it is but so-so. Art thou wise?
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember a saying: “The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.” The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips when heput it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes weremade to eat and lips to open. You do love this maid?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do, sir.
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
No, sir.
Then learn this of me: to have is to have. For it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out of a cupinto a glass, by filling the one doth empty the other. For all your writers do consent that ipse is “he.” Now, you are not ipse, for I am he.
Which he, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you clown, abandon—which is, in the vulgar, “leave”—the society—which in the boorish is “company”—of this female—which in the common is “woman” ; which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into bondage. I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel. I will bandy with thee in faction. I will o'errun thee with policy. I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways. Therefore tremble and depart.
Do, good William.
God rest you merry, sir.
Our master and mistress seeks you. Come away, away.
Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey.—I attend, I attend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is ’t possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? That, but seeing, you should love her? And loving, woo? And wooing, she should grant? And will you persevere to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with me “I love Aliena”; say with her that she loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other. It shall be to your good, for my father’s house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland’s will I estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow. Thither will I invite the duke and all’s contented followers. Go you and prepare Aliena, for look you, here comes my Rosalind.
[As Ganymede] God save you, brother.
And you, fair sister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws ofa lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed me your handkercher?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and greater wonders than that.
Oh, I know where you are. Nay, ’tis true. There was never anything so sudden but the fight of two rams and Caesar’s thrasonical brag of “I came, saw, and overcame.” For your brother and my sister no sooner met but they looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. They are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.
They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the duketo the nuptial. But Oh, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man’s eyes. By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
Why, then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Knowof me then—for now I speak to some purpose—that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit. I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are. Neither do I labor for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you to do yourself good, and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things. I have, since I was three year old, conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her. I know into what straits of fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow, human as she is, and without any danger.
Speak’st thou in sober meanings?
By my life I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a magician. Therefore put you in your best array, bidyour friends; for if you will be married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentlenessTo show the letter that I writ to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I care not if I have. It is my study To seem despiteful and ungentle to you. You are there followed by a faithful shepherd. Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what ’tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears, And so am I for Phoebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and service, And so am I for Phoebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is to be all made of fantasy, All made of passion and all made of wishes, All adoration, duty, and observance, All humbleness, all patience and impatience, All purity, all trial, all observance, And so am I for Phoebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Why do you speak, too, “Why blame you me to love you?”?
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you, no more of this. 'Tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon. [to SILVIUS] I will helpyou, if I can. [to PHOEBE] I would love you if I could.— Tomorrow meet me all together. [to PHOEBE] I will marry you if ever I marry woman, and I’ll be married tomorrow. [to ORLANDO] I will satisfy you if ever I satisfy man, and you shall be married tomorrow. [to SILVIUS] I will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married tomorrow. [to ORLANDO] As you love Rosalind, meet. [to SILVIUS] As you love Phoebe, meet.— And as I love no woman, I’ll meet. So fare you well. I have left you commands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey. Tomorrow will we bemarried.
I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes two of the banished duke’s pages.
Well met, honest gentleman.
By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you. Sit i' th' middle.
Shall we clap into ’t roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like two gypsieson a horse.
[sing] It was a lover and his lass, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, That o'er the green cornfield did pass In springtime, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, Hey ding a ding, ding. Sweet lovers love the spring. Between the acres of the rye, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, These pretty country folks would lie In springtime, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, Hey ding a ding, ding. Sweet lovers love the spring. This carol they began that hour, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, How that a life was but a flower In springtime, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, Hey ding a ding, ding. Sweet lovers love the spring. And therefore take the present time, With a hey, and a ho, and a hhey-nonny-no, For love is crownèd with the prime In springtime, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, Hey ding a ding, ding. Sweet lovers love the spring.
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untunable.
You are deceived, sir. We kept time. We lost not our time.
By my troth, yes. I count it but time lost to hear sucha foolish song. God be wi' you, and God mend your voices.— Come, Audrey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boyCan do all this that he hath promisèd?
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
[as Ganymede] Patience once more whiles our compact isurged. [to DUKE SENIOR] You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
[to ORLANDO] And you say you will have her when I bringher?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
[to PHOEBE] You say you’ll marry me if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,You’ll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
So is the bargain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to SILVIUS] You say that you’ll have Phoebe if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even. Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter, —You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter. —Keep your word, Phoebe, that you’ll marry me Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd. —Keep your word, Silvius, that you’ll marry her If she refuse me. And from hence I go To make these doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherd boySome lively touches of my daughter’s favor.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him Methought he was a brother to your daughter. But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born And hath been tutored in the rudiments Of many desperate studies by his uncle, Whom he reports to be a great magician Obscurèd in the circle of this forest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of very strangebeasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all.
Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in the forest. He hath been a courtier, he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. I have trod a measure. I have flattered a lady. I have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy. I have undone three tailors. I have had four quarrels, andlike to have fought one.
And how was that ta'en up?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, we met and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.
How “seventh cause?”—Good my lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God 'ild you, sir. I desire you of the like. I press inhere, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives,to swear and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks. A poor virgin, sir, an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own. A poor humor of mine, sir, to take that that no man else will. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]According to the fool’s bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrelon the seventh cause?
Upon a lie seven times removed.— Bear your body more seeming, Audrey.— As thus, sir: I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier’s beard. He sent me word if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was. This is called “the retort courteous.” If I sent him wordagain it was not well cut, he would send me word he cutit to please himself. This is called “the quip modest.” If again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. This is called “the reply churlish.” If again it was notwell cut, he would answer I spake not true. This is called “the reproof valiant.” If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie. This is called “the countercheck quarrelsome,” and so to “the lie circumstantial” and “the lie direct.”
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the lie direct, and so we measured swords and parted.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good manners. I will name you the degrees: thefirst, “the retort courteous;” the second, “the quip modest;” the third, “the reply churlish;” the fourth, “the reproof valiant;” the fifth, “the countercheque quarrelsome;” the sixth, “the lie with circumstance;” the seventh, “the lie direct.” All these you may avoid but the lie direct, and you may avoid that, too, with an“if.” I knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an “if,” as: “If you said so, then I said so.” And they shook hands and swore brothers. Your “if” is the only peacemaker: much virtue in “if.”
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? He’s as good at anything and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under thepresentation of that he shoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heaven When earthly things, made even, Atone together. Good duke, receive thy daughter. Hymen from heaven brought her, Yea, brought her hither, That thou mightst join her hand with his Whose heart within her bosom is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to DUKE SENIOR] To you I give myself, for I am yours. [to ORLANDO] To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true, Why then, my love adieu.
[to DUKE SENIOR] I’ll have no father, if you be not he. [to ORLANDO] I’ll have no husband, if you be not he, [to PHOEBE] Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, ho! I bar confusion. 'Tis I must make conclusion Of these most strange events. Here’s eight that must take hands To join in Hymen’s bands, If truth holds true contents. [to ORLANDO and ROSALIND] You and you no cross shall part. [to OLIVER and CELIA] You and you are heart in heart. [to PHOEBE] You to his love must accord Or have a woman to your lord. [to TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY] You and you are sure together As the winter to foul weather. [to all] Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing, Feed yourselves with questioning, That reason wonder may diminish How thus we met, and these things finish. [sings] Wedding is great Juno’s crown, O blessèd bond of board and bed. 'Tis Hymen peoples every town. High wedlock then be honorèd. Honor, high honor, and renown, To Hymen, god of every town.
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me,Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.
I will not eat my word. Now thou art mine,Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two. I am the second son of old Sir Rowland, That bring these tidings to this fair assembly. Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day Men of great worth resorted to this forest, Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot In his own conduct, purposely to take His brother here and put him to the sword. And to the skirts of this wild wood he came, Where, meeting with an old religious man, After some question with him, was converted Both from his enterprise and from the world, His crown bequeathing to his banished brother, And all their lands restored to them again That were with him exiled. This to be true I do engage my life.
Welcome, young man. Thou offer’st fairly to thy brothers' wedding: To one his lands withheld, and to the other A land itself at large, a potent dukedom. —First, in this forest let us do those ends That here were well begun and well begot, And, after, every of this happy number That have endured shrewd days and nights with us Shall share the good of our returnèd fortune According to the measure of their states. Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity, And fall into our rustic revelry. —Play, music.— And you brides and bridegrooms all, With measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly, The duke hath put on a religious lifeAnd thrown into neglect the pompous court.
He hath.
To him will I. Out of these convertites There is much matter to be heard and learned. [to DUKE SENIOR] You to your former honor I bequeath; Your patience and your virtue well deserves it. [to ORLANDO] You to a love that your true faith doth merit. [to OLIVER] You to your land, and love, and great allies. [to SILVIUS] You to a long and well-deservèd bed. [to TOUCHSTONE] And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage Is but for two months victualled.— So to your pleasures. I am for other than for dancing measures.
Stay, Jaques, stay.
To see no pastime I. What you would have I’ll stay to know at your abandoned cave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Proceed, proceed. We’ll so begin these ritesAs we do trust they’ll end, in true delights.
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, butit is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs no bush, ’tis true that a good play needs no epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. What a case amI in, then, that am neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play. I am not furnished like a beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. My way is to conjure you, and I’ll begin withthe women. I charge you, O women, for the love you bearto men, to like as much of this play as please you. AndI charge you, O men, for the love you bear to women—as I perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them—that between you and the women the play may please. If I were a woman, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths that I defied not. And I am sure as many as havegood beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will, for my kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
Speak, speak.
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Resolved. resolved.
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.
We know't, we know't.
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.Is't a verdict?
No more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One word, good citizens.
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear: the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. Let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very well; and could be content to give him goodreport fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud; which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in his nature, you account avice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What shouts are these? The other side o' the cityis risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!
Come, come.
Soft! who comes here?
Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always lovedthe people.
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go youWith bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.
Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,Will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.
I tell you, friends, most charitable care Have the patricians of you. For your wants, Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them Against the Roman state, whose course will on The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs Of more strong link asunder than can ever Appear in your impediment. For the dearth, The gods, not the patricians, make it, and Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack, You are transported by calamity Thither where more attends you, and you slander The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers, When you curse them as enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.
Either you must Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture To stale 't a little more.
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think tofob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't pleaseyou, deliver.
There was a time when all the body's members Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it: That only like a gulf it did remain I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel, And, mutually participate, did minister Unto the appetite and affection common Of the whole body. The belly answer'd—
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile, Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus— For, look you, I may make the belly smile As well as speak—it tauntingly replied To the discontented members, the mutinous parts That envied his receipt; even so most fitly As you malign our senators for that They are not such as you.
Your belly's answer? What! The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter. With other muniments and petty helps In this our fabric, if that they—
What then?'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,Who is the sink o' the body,—
Well, what then?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The former agents, if they did complain,What could the belly answer?
I will tell youIf you'll bestow a small—of what you have little—Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
Ye're long about it.
Note me this, good friend; Your most grave belly was deliberate, Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd: 'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'That I receive the general food at first, Which you do live upon; and fit it is, Because I am the store-house and the shop Of the whole body: but, if you do remember, I send it through the rivers of your blood, Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain; And, through the cranks and offices of man, The strongest nerves and small inferior veins From me receive that natural competency Whereby they live: and though that all at once, You, my good friends,'—this says the belly, mark me,—
Ay, sir; well, well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Though all at once cannot See what I do deliver out to each, Yet I can make my audit up, that all From me do back receive the flour of all, And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?
It was an answer: how apply you this?
The senators of Rome are this good belly, And you the mutinous members; for examine Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find No public benefit which you receive But it proceeds or comes from them to you And no way from yourselves. What do you think, You, the great toe of this assembly?
I the great toe! why the great toe?
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest, Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost: Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run, Lead'st first to win some vantage. But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs: Rome and her rats are at the point of battle; The one side must have bale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail, noble Marcius!
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues, That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, Make yourselves scabs?
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words to thee will flatter Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs, That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you, The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you, Where he should find you lions, finds you hares; Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, Than is the coal of fire upon the ice, Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is To make him worthy whose offence subdues him And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness Deserves your hate; and your affections are A sick man's appetite, who desires most that Which would increase his evil. He that depends Upon your favours swims with fins of lead And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye? With every minute you do change a mind, And call him noble that was now your hate, Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter, That in these several places of the city You cry against the noble senate, who, Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?
For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say,The city is well stored.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang 'em! They say! They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know What's done i' the Capitol; who's like to rise, Who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out Conjectural marriages; making parties strong And feebling such as stand not in their liking Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's grain enough! Would the nobility lay aside their ruth, And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high As I could pick my lance.
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; For though abundantly they lack discretion, Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you, What says the other troop?
They are dissolved: hang 'em! They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs, That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds They vented their complainings; which being answer'd, And a petition granted them, a strange one— To break the heart of generosity, And make bold power look pale— they threw their caps As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon, Shouting their emulation.
What is granted them?
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms, Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus, Sicinius Velutus, and I know not— 'Sdeath! The rabble should have first unroof'd the city, Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time Win upon power and throw forth greater themes For insurrection's arguing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is strange.
Go, get you home, you fragments!
Where's Caius Marcius?
Here: what's the matter?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to ventOur musty superfluity. See, our best elders.
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us;The Volsces are in arms.
They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't. I sin in envying his nobility, And were I any thing but what I am, I would wish me only he.
You have fought together.
Were half to half the world by the ears and he. Upon my party, I'd revolt to make Only my wars with him: he is a lion That I am proud to hunt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, worthy Marcius,Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir, it is; And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face. What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?
No, Caius Marcius;I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,Ere stay behind this business.
O, true-bred!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,Our greatest friends attend us.
[To COMINIUS] Lead you on. [To MARCIUS] Follow Cominius; We must follow you; Right worthy you priority.
Noble Marcius!
[To the Citizens] Hence to your homes; be gone!
Nay, let them follow:The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thitherTo gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,—
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?
Nay. but his taunts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
Be-mock the modest moon.
The present wars devour him: he is grownToo proud to be so valiant.
Such a nature, Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder His insolence can brook to be commanded Under Cominius.
Fame, at the which he aims, In whom already he's well graced, can not Better be held nor more attain'd than by A place below the first: for what miscarries Shall be the general's fault, though he perform To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he Had borne the business!'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Besides, if things go well,Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shallOf his demerits rob Cominius.
Come: Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius. Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed In aught he merit not.
Let's hence, and hear How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion, More than his singularity, he goes Upon this present action.
Lets along.
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,That they of Rome are entered in our counselsAnd know how we proceed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it not yours? What ever have been thought on in this state, That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
'They have press'd a power, but it is not known Whether for east or west: the dearth is great; The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd, Cominius, Marcius your old enemy, Who is of Rome worse hated than of you, And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman, These three lead on this preparation Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you: Consider of it.'
Our army's in the fieldWe never yet made doubt but Rome was readyTo answer us.
Nor did you think it folly To keep your great pretences veil'd till when They needs must show themselves; which in the hatching, It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was To take in many towns ere almost Rome Should know we were afoot.
Noble Aufidius, Take your commission; hie you to your bands: Let us alone to guard Corioli: If they set down before 's, for the remove Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find They've not prepared for us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, doubt not that; I speak from certainties. Nay, more, Some parcels of their power are forth already, And only hitherward. I leave your honours. If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet, 'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike Till one can do no more.
The gods assist you!
And keep your honours safe!
Farewell.
Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell.
I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where he would show most love. When yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering how honour would become such a person—that it was no better than picture-like to hang by the wall—if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
But had he died in the business, madam; how then?
Then his good report should have been my son; I therein would have found issue. Hear me profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love alike and none less dear than thine and my good Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
Indeed, you shall not. Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum, See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair, As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him: Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus: 'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear, Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes, Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow Or all or lose his hire.
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba, When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria, We are fit to bid her welcome.
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his kneeAnd tread upon his neck.
My ladies both, good day to you.
Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in goodfaith. How does your little son?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, thanlook upon his school-master.
O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o' Wednesday half an hour together: has such a confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked it!
One on 's father's moods.
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A crack, madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you playthe idle husewife with me this afternoon.
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.
Not out of doors!
She shall, she shall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over thethreshold till my lord return from the wars.
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her withmy prayers; but I cannot go thither.
Why, I pray you?
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.
In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell youexcellent news of your husband.
O, good madam, there can be none yet.
Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news fromhim last night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, madam?
In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it. Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true, on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.
Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in everything hereafter.
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will butdisease our better mirth.
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thysolemness out o' door. and go along with us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wishyou much mirth.
Well, then, farewell.
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
My horse to yours, no.
'Tis done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Agreed.
Say, has our general met the enemy?
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.
So, the good horse is mine.
I'll buy him of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I willFor half a hundred years. Summon the town.
How far off lie these armies?
Within this mile and half.
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours. Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work, That we with smoking swords may march from hence, To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, nor a man that fears you less than he,That's lesser than a little.
Hark! our drums Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls, Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates, Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes; They'll open of themselves.
Hark you. far off!There is Aufidius; list, what work he makesAmongst your cloven army.
O, they are at it!
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They fear us not, but issue forth their city. Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight With hearts more proof than shields. Advance, brave Titus: They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows: He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce, And he shall feel mine edge.
All the contagion of the south light on you, You shames of Rome! you herd of— Boils and plagues Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd Further than seen and one infect another Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese, That bear the shapes of men, how have you run From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell! All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home, Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe And make my wars on you: l ook to't: come on; If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives, As they us to our trenches followed.
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.
Fool-hardiness; not I.
Nor I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See, they have shut him in.
To the pot, I warrant him.
What is become of Marcius?
Slain, sir, doubtless.
Following the fliers at the very heels, With them he enters; who, upon the sudden, Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone, To answer all the city.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O noble fellow! Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword, And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius: A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds, Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world Were feverous and did tremble.
Look, sir.
O,'tis Marcius!Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
This will I carry to Rome.
And I this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A murrain on't! I took this for silver.
See here these movers that do prize their hours At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons, Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves, Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them! And hark, what noise the general makes! To him! There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius, Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take Convenient numbers to make good the city; Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste To help Cominius.
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;Thy exercise hath been too violent forA second course of fight.
Sir, praise me not; My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well: The blood I drop is rather physical Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus I will appear, and fight.
Now the fair goddess, Fortune, Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman, Prosperity be thy page!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy friend no lessThan those she placeth highest! So, farewell.
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place;Call thither all the officers o' the town,Where they shall know our mind: away!
Breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands, Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs, We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck, By interims and conveying gusts we have heard The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods! Lead their successes as we wish our own, That both our powers, with smiling fronts encountering, May give you thankful sacrifice.
Thy news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The citizens of Corioli have issued, And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle: I saw our party to their trenches driven, And then I came away.
Though thou speak'st truth,Methinks thou speak'st not well.How long is't since?
Above an hour, my lord.
'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums:How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,And bring thy news so late?
Spies of the Volsces Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel Three or four miles about, else had I, sir, Half an hour since brought my report.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who's yonder, That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have Before-time seen him thus.
[Within] Come I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabourMore than I know the sound of Marcius' tongueFrom every meaner man.
Come I too late?
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,But mantled in your own.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, let me clip ye In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart As merry as when our nuptial day was done, And tapers burn'd to bedward!
Flower of warriors,How is it with Titus Lartius?
As with a man busied about decrees: Condemning some to death, and some to exile; Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other; Holding Corioli in the name of Rome, Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash, To let him slip at will.
Where is that slaveWhich told me they had beat you to your trenches?Where is he? call him hither.
Let him alone; He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen, The common file—a plague! tribunes for them!— The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge From rascals worse than they.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But how prevail'd you?
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?If not, why cease you till you are so?
Marcius,We have at disadvantage fought and didRetire to win our purpose.
How lies their battle? know you on which sideThey have placed their men of trust?
As I guess, Marcius,Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,Their very heart of hope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech you, By all the battles wherein we have fought, By the blood we have shed together, by the vows We have made to endure friends, that you directly Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates; And that you not delay the present, but, Filling the air with swords advanced and darts, We prove this very hour.
Though I could wish You were conducted to a gentle bath And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never Deny your asking: take your choice of those That best can aid your action.
Those are they That most are willing. If any such be here— As it were sin to doubt— that love this painting Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear Lesser his person than an ill report; If any think brave death outweighs bad life And that his country's dearer than himself; Let him alone, or so many so minded, Wave thus, to express his disposition, And follow Marcius.
O, me alone! make you a sword of me? If these shows be not outward, which of you But is four Volsces? none of you but is Able to bear against the great Aufidius A shield as hard as his. A certain number, Though thanks to all, must I select from all: the rest Shall bear the business in some other fight, As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march; And four shall quickly draw out my command, Which men are best inclined.
March on, my fellows:Make good this ostentation, and you shallDivide in all with us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties, As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve For a short holding: if we lose the field, We cannot keep the town.
Fear not our care, sir.
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.
I'll fight with none but thee; for I do hate theeWorse than a promise-breaker.
We hate alike:Not Afric owns a serpent I abhorMore than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let the first budger die the other's slave,And the gods doom him after!
If I fly, Marcius,Holloa me like a hare.
Within these three hours, Tullus, Alone I fought in your Corioli walls, And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood Wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge Wrench up thy power to the highest.
Wert thou the HectorThat was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,Thou shouldst not scape me here.
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed meIn your condemned seconds.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work, Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles, Where great patricians shall attend and shrug, I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted, And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull tribunes, That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours, Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods Our Rome hath such a soldier.' Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, Having fully dined before.
O general,Here is the steed, we the caparison:Hadst thou beheld—
Pray now, no more: my mother, Who has a charter to extol her blood, When she does praise me grieves me. I have done As you have done; that's what I can; induced As you have been; that's for my country: He that has but effected his good will Hath overta'en mine act.
You shall not be The grave of your deserving; Rome must know The value of her own: 'twere a concealment Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, To hide your doings; and to silence that, Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd, Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you In sign of what you are, not to reward What you have done— before our army hear me.
I have some wounds upon me, and they smartTo hear themselves remember'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Should they not, Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude, And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses, Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all The treasure in this field achieved and city, We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth, Before the common distribution, at Your only choice.
I thank you, general; But cannot make my heart consent to take A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it; And stand upon my common part with those That have beheld the doing.
May these same instruments, which you profane, Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk, Let him be made a coverture for the wars! No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.— Which, without note, here's many else have done,— You shout me forth In acclamations hyperbolical; As if I loved my little should be dieted In praises sauced with lies.
Too modest are you; More cruel to your good report than grateful To us that give you truly: by your patience, If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you, Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles, Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known, As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius Wears this war's garland: in token of the which, My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him, With all his trim belonging; and from this time, For what he did before Corioli, call him, With all the applause and clamour of the host, CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear The addition nobly ever!
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will go wash; And when my face is fair, you shall perceive Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you. I mean to stride your steed, and at all times To undercrest your good addition To the fairness of my power.
So, to our tent; Where, ere we do repose us, we will write To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius, Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome The best, with whom we may articulate, For their own good and ours.
I shall, my lord.
The gods begin to mock me. I, that nowRefused most princely gifts, am bound to begOf my lord general.
Take't; 'tis yours. What is't?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I sometime lay here in Corioli At a poor man's house; he used me kindly: He cried to me; I saw him prisoner; But then Aufidius was with in my view, And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you To give my poor host freedom.
O, well begg'd!Were he the butcher of my son, he shouldBe free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.
Marcius, his name?
By Jupiter! forgot.I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.Have we no wine here?
Go we to our tent:The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis timeIt should be look'd to: come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The town is ta'en!
'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.
Condition! I would I were a Roman; for I cannot, Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition! What good condition can a treaty find I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius, I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me, And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter As often as we eat. By the elements, If e'er again I meet him beard to beard, He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation Hath not that honour in't it had; for where I thought to crush him in an equal force, True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way Or wrath or craft may get him.
He's the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd With only suffering stain by him; for him Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary, Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol, The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it At home, upon my brother's guard, even there, Against the hospitable canon, would I Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city; Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must Be hostages for Rome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will not you go?
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you— 'Tis south the city mills— bring me word thither How the world goes, that to the pace of it I may spur on my journey.
I shall, sir.
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
Good or bad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not according to the prayer of the people, for theylove not Marcius.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
Pray you, who does the wolf love?
The lamb.
Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would thenoble Marcius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You twoare old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
Well, sir.
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you twohave not in abundance?
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Especially in pride.
And topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now: do you two know how you arecensured here in the city, I mean of us o' theright-hand file? do you?
Why, how are we censured?
Because you talk of pride now,—will you not be angry?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, well, sir, well.
Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience: give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for being proud?
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you can do very little alone; for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! O that you could!
What then, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, asany in Rome.
Menenius, you are known well enough too.
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion; one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as you are—I cannot call you Lycurguses— if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in compound with the major part of your syllables: and though I must be content to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you you have good faces. If you see this in the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known well enough too? what harm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be known well enough too?
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a second day of audience. When you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers; set up the bloody flag against all patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled by your hearing: all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come, you are well understood to be aperfecter giber for the table than a necessarybencher in the Capitol.
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack- saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud; who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to your worships: more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,—and the moon,were she earthly, no nobler,—whither do you followyour eyes so fast?
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; forthe love of Juno, let's go.
Ha! Marcius coming home!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperousapprobation.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!Marcius coming home!
Nay,'tis true.
Look, here's a letter from him: the state hathanother, his wife another; and, I think, there's oneat home for you.
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter forme!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven years' health; in which time I will make a lip at the physician: the most sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.
O, no, no, no.
O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't.
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time homewith the oaken garland.
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, butAufidius got off.
And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that: an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate has letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name of the war: he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without histrue purchasing.
The gods grant them true!
True! pow, wow.
True! I'll be sworn they are true.Where is he wounded? [To the Tribunes] God save your good worships! Marcius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will belarge cicatrices to show the people, when he shallstand for his place. He received in the repulse ofTarquin seven hurts i' the body.
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,—there'snine that I know.
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-fivewounds upon him.
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
Hark! the trumpets.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie; Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight Within Corioli gates: where he hath won, With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these In honour follows Coriolanus. Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
No more of this; it does offend my heart:Pray now, no more.
Look, sir, your mother!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O,You have, I know, petition'd all the godsFor my prosperity!
Nay, my good soldier, up; My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and By deed-achieving honour newly named,— What is it?— Coriolanus must I call thee?— But O, thy wife!
My gracious silence, hail! Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home, That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear, Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear, And mothers that lack sons.
Now, the gods crown thee!
And live you yet?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my sweet lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome. A curse begin at very root on's heart, That is not glad to see thee! You are three That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men, We have some old crab-trees here at home that will not Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors: We call a nettle but a nettle and The faults of fools but folly.
Ever right.
Menenius ever, ever.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give way there, and go on!
[To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA] Your hand, and yours: Ere in our own house I do shade my head, The good patricians must be visited; From whom I have received not only greetings, But with them change of honours.
I have lived To see inherited my very wishes And the buildings of my fancy: only There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but Our Rome will cast upon thee.
Know, good mother,I had rather be their servant in my way,Than sway with them in theirs.
On, to the Capitol!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse Into a rapture lets her baby cry While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows, Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed With variable complexions, all agreeing In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens Do press among the popular throngs and puff To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames Commit the war of white and damask in Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother As if that whatsoever god who leads him Were slily crept into his human powers And gave him graceful posture.
On the sudden,I warrant him consul.
Then our office may,During his power, go sleep.
He cannot temperately transport his honoursFrom where he should begin and end, but willLose those he hath won.
In that there's comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doubt not The commoners, for whom we stand, but they Upon their ancient malice will forget With the least cause these his new honours, which That he will give them make I as little question As he is proud to do't.
I heard him swear, Were he to stand for consul, never would he Appear i' the market-place nor on him put The napless vesture of humility; Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds To the people, beg their stinking breaths.
'Tis right.
It was his word: O, he would miss it ratherThan carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,And the desire of the nobles.
I wish no betterThan have him hold that purpose and to put itIn execution.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis most like he will.
It shall be to him then as our good wills,A sure destruction.
So it must fall out To him or our authorities. For an end, We must suggest the people in what hatred He still hath held them; that to's power he would Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, In human action and capacity, Of no more soul nor fitness for the world Than camels in the war, who have their provand Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows For sinking under them.
This, as you say, suggested At some time when his soaring insolence Shall touch the people — which time shall not want, If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy As to set dogs on sheep— will be his fire To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze Shall darken him for ever.
What's the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought That Marcius shall be consul: I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves, Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended, As to Jove's statue, and the commons made A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts: I never saw the like.
Let's to the Capitol;And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,But hearts for the event.
Have with you.
Come, come, they are almost here. How many standfor consulships?
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every oneCoriolanus will carry it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, andloves not the common people.
Faith, there had been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets them plainly see't.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than can render it him; and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him their opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, having been supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further deed to have them at an into their estimation and report: but he hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions in their hearts, that for their tongues to be silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, theyare coming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Having determined of the Volsces and To send for Titus Lartius, it remains, As the main point of this our after-meeting, To gratify his noble service that Hath thus stood for his country: therefore, please you, Most reverend and grave elders, to desire The present consul, and last general In our well-found successes, to report A little of that worthy work perform'd By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom We met here both to thank and to remember With honours like himself.
Speak, good Cominius: Leave nothing out for length, and make us think Rather our state's defective for requital Than we to stretch it out. [To the Tribunes] Masters o' the people, We do request your kindest ears, and after, Your loving motion toward the common body,To yield what passes here.
We are convented Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts Inclinable to honour and advance The theme of our assembly.
Which the rather We shall be blest to do, if he remember A kinder value of the people than He hath hereto prized them at.
That's off, that's off;I would you rather had been silent. Please youTo hear Cominius speak?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most willingly;But yet my caution was more pertinentThan the rebuke you give it.
He loves your peopleBut tie him not to be their bedfellow.Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hearWhat you have nobly done.
Your horror's pardon:I had rather have my wounds to heal againThan hear say how I got them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I hopeMy words disbench'd you not.
No, sir: yet oft, When blows have made me stay, I fled from words. You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your people, I love them as they weigh.
Pray now, sit down.
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sunWhen the alarum were struck than idly sitTo hear my nothings monster'd.
Masters of the people, Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter— That's thousand to one good one— when you now see He had rather venture all his limbs for honour Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held That valour is the chiefest virtue, and Most dignifies the haver: if it be, The man I speak of cannot in the world Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years, When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator, Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight, When with his Amazonian chin he drove The bristled lips before him: be bestrid An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met, And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats, When he might act the woman in the scene, He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea, And in the brunt of seventeen battles since He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last, Before and in Corioli, let me say, I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers; And by his rare example made the coward Turn terror into sport: as weeds before A vessel under sail, so men obey'd And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp, Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot He was a thing of blood, whose every motion Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd The mortal gate of the city, which he painted With shunless destiny; aidless came off, And with a sudden reinforcement struck Corioli like a planet: now all's his: When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, And to the battle came he; where he did Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if 'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd Both field and city ours, he never stood To ease his breast with panting.
Worthy man!
He cannot but with measure fit the honoursWhich we devise him.
Our spoils he kick'd at, And look'd upon things precious as they were The common muck of the world: he covets less Than misery itself would give; rewards His deeds with doing them, and is content To spend the time to end it.
He's right noble:Let him be call'd for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call Coriolanus.
He doth appear.
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleasedTo make thee consul.
I do owe them stillMy life and services.
It then remainsThat you do speak to the people.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech you, Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you That I may pass this doing.
Sir, the peopleMust have their voices; neither will they bateOne jot of ceremony.
Put them not to't: Pray you, go fit you to the custom and Take to you, as your predecessors have, Your honour with your form.
It is apartThat I shall blush in acting, and might wellBe taken from the people.
Mark you that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus; Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, As if I had received them for the hire Of their breath only!
Do not stand upon't. We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul Wish we all joy and honour.
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!
You see how he intends to use the people.
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,As if he did contemn what he requestedShould be in them to give.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, we'll inform themOf our proceedings here: on the marketplace,I know, they do attend us.
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to denyhim.
We may, sir, if we will.
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do; for if he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, were to make a monster of the multitude: of the which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
And to make us no better thought of, a little helpwill serve; for once we stood up about the corn, hehimself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have been called so of many; not that our heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south, and their consent of one direct way should be at once to all the points o' the compass.
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit wouldfly?
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man'swill;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, butif it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
Why that way?
To lose itself in a fog, where being three partsmelted away with rotten dews, the fourth would returnfor conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I say, if he would incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes. He's to make his requests by particulars; wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how you shall go by him.
Content, content.
O sir, you are not right: have you not knownThe worthiest men have done't?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What must I say? 'I Pray, sir'— Plague upon't! I cannot bring My tongue to such a pace:—'Look, sir, my wounds! I got them in my country's service, when Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran From the noise of our own drums.'
O me, the gods!You must not speak of that: you must desire themTo think upon you.
Think upon me! hang 'em!I would they would forget me, like the virtuesWhich our divines lose by 'em.
You'll mar all:I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,In wholesome manner.
Bid them wash their facesAnd keep their teeth clean.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, here comes a brace.
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.
We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.
Mine own desert.
Your own desert!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but not mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble thepoor with begging.
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope togain by you.
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The price is to ask it kindly.
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds toshow you, which shall be yours in private. Yourgood voice, sir; what say you?
You shall ha' it, worthy sir.
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voicesbegged. I have your alms: adieu.
But this is something odd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An 'twere to give again,—but 'tis no matter.
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of yourvoices that I may be consul, I have here thecustomary gown.
You have deserved nobly of your country, and youhave not deserved nobly.
Your enigma?
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you havebeen a rod to her friends; you have not indeed lovedthe common people.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You should account me the more virtuous that I have not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man and give it bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, I may be consul.
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore giveyou our voices heartily.
You have received many wounds for your country.
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. Iwill make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most sweet voices! Better it is to die, better to starve, Than crave the hire which first we do deserve. Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here, To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear, Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't: What custom wills, in all things should we do't, The dust on antique time would lie unswept, And mountainous error be too highly heapt For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so, Let the high office and the honour go To one that would do thus. I am half through; The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
Here come more voices. Your voices: for your voices I have fought; Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six I have seen and heard of; for your voices have Done many things, some less, some more your voices: Indeed I would be consul.
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honestman's voice.
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,and make him good friend to the people!
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Worthy voices!
You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes Endue you with the people's voice: remains That, in the official marks invested, you Anon do meet the senate.
Is this done?
The custom of request you have discharged:The people do admit you, and are summon'dTo meet anon, upon your approbation.
Where? at the senate-house?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There, Coriolanus.
May I change these garments?
You may, sir.
That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again,Repair to the senate-house.
I'll keep you company. Will you along?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We stay here for the people.
Fare you well.
He has it now, and by his looks methink'Tis warm at 's heart.
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.will you dismiss the people?
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He has our voices, sir.
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.
CertainlyHe flouted us downright.
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not one amongst us, save yourself, but saysHe used us scornfully: he should have show'd usHis marks of merit, wounds received for's country.
Why, so he did, I am sure.
No, no; no man saw 'em.
He said he had wounds, which he could show in private; And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn, 'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom, But by your voices, will not so permit me; Your voices therefore.' When we granted that, Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you: Your most sweet voices: now you have left your voices, I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant to see't,Or, seeing it, of such childish friendlinessTo yield your voices?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Could you not have told him As you were lesson'd, when he had no power, But was a petty servant to the state, He was your enemy, ever spake against Your liberties and the charters that you bear I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving A place of potency and sway o' the state, If he should still malignantly remain Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might Be curses to yourselves? You should have said That as his worthy deeds did claim no less Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature Would think upon you for your voices and Translate his malice towards you into love, Standing your friendly lord.
Thus to have said, As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd Either his gracious promise, which you might, As cause had call'd you up, have held him to Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, Which easily endures not article Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage, You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler And pass'd him unelected.
Did you perceive He did solicit you in free contempt When he did need your loves, and do you think That his contempt shall not be bruising to you, When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry Against the rectorship of judgment?
Have you Ere now denied the asker? and now again Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow Your sued-for tongues?
He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And will deny him:I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, They have chose a consul that will from them take Their liberties; make them of no more voice Than dogs that are as often beat for barking As therefore kept to do so.
Let them assemble, And on a safer judgment all revoke Your ignorant election; enforce his pride, And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not With what contempt he wore the humble weed, How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves, Thinking upon his services, took from you The apprehension of his present portance, Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion After the inveterate hate he bears you.
LayA fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured,No impediment between, but that you mustCast your election on him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, you chose him More after our commandment than as guided By your own true affections, and that your minds, Preoccupied with what you rather must do Than what you should, made you against the grain To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you. How youngly he began to serve his country, How long continued, and what stock he springs of, The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son, Who, after great Hostilius, here was king; Of the same house Publius and Quintus were, That our beat water brought by conduits hither; And [Censorinus,] nobly named so, Twice being [by the people chosen] censor, Was his great ancestor.
One thus descended, That hath beside well in his person wrought To be set high in place, we did commend To your remembrances: but you have found, Scaling his present bearing with his past, That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke Your sudden approbation.
Say, you ne'er had done't— Harp on that still— but by our putting on; And presently, when you have drawn your number, Repair to the Capitol.
We will so: almost allRepent in their election.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let them go on; This mutiny were better put in hazard, Than stay, past doubt, for greater: If, as his nature is, he fall in rage With their refusal, both observe and answer The vantage of his anger.
To the Capitol, come: We will be there before the stream o' the people; And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own, Which we have goaded onward.
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
He had, my lord; and that it was which causedOur swifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.Upon's again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They are worn, lord consul, so,That we shall hardly in our ages seeTheir banners wave again.
Saw you Aufidius?
On safe-guard he came to me; and did curseAgainst the Volsces, for they had so vilelyYielded the town: he is retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How? what?
How often he had met you, sword to sword; That of all things upon the earth he hated Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes To hopeless restitution, so he might Be call'd your vanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Behold, these are the tribunes of the people, The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them; For they do prank them in authority, Against all noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ha! what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.
What makes this change?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The matter?
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had children's voices?
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The people are incensed against him.
Stop,Or all will fall in broil.
Are these your herd? Must these have voices, that can yield them now And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your offices? You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? Have you not set them on?
Be calm, be calm.
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, To curb the will of the nobility: Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule Nor ever will be ruled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call't not a plot: The people cry you mock'd them, and of late, When corn was given them gratis, you repined; Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you inform'd them sithence?
How! I inform them!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are like to do such business.
Not unlike,Each way, to better yours.
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,Let me deserve so ill as you, and make meYour fellow tribune.
You show too much of that For which the people stir: if you will pass To where you are bound, you must inquire your way, Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit, Or never be so noble as a consul, Nor yoke with him for tribune.
Let's be calm.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The people are abused; set on. This paltering Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely I' the plain way of his merit.
Tell me of corn!This was my speech, and I will speak't again—
Not now, not now.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends, I crave their pardons: For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them Regard me as I do not flatter, and Therein behold themselves: I say again, In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition, Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd, and scatter'd, By mingling them with us, the honour'd number, Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that Which they have given to beggars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How! no more! As for my country I have shed my blood, Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs Coin words till their decay against those measles, Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought The very way to catch them.
You speak o' the people,As if you were a god to punish, notA man of their infirmity.
'Twere wellWe let the people know't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, what? his choler?
Choler!Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,By Jove, 'twould be my mind!
It is a mindThat shall remain a poison where it is,Not poison any further.
Shall remain!Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark youHis absolute 'shall'?
'Twas from the canon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Shall'! O good but most unwise patricians! why, You grave but reckless senators, have you thus Given Hydra here to choose an officer, That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit To say he'll turn your current in a ditch, And make your channel his? If he have power Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd, Be not as common fools; if you are not, Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians, If they be senators: and they are no less, When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate, And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' His popular 'shall' against a graver bench Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself! It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches To know, when two authorities are up, Neither supreme, how soon confusion May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take The one by the other.
Well, on to the market-place.
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forthThe corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas usedSometime in Greece,—
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had more absolute power,I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fedThe ruin of the state.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, shall the people giveOne that speaks thus their voice?
I'll give my reasons, More worthier than their voices. They know the corn Was not our recompense, resting well assured That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war, Even when the navel of the state was touch'd, They would not thread the gates. This kind of service Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation Which they have often made against the senate, All cause unborn, could never be the motive Of our so frank donation. Well, what then? How shall this bisson multitude digest The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express What's like to be their words: 'we did request it; We are the greater poll, and in true fear They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase The nature of our seats and make the rabble Call our cares fears; which will in time Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in The crows to peck the eagles.
Come, enough.
Enough, with over-measure.
No, take more: What may be sworn by, both divine and human, Seal what I end withal! This double worship, Where one part does disdain with cause, the other Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom, Cannot conclude but by the yea and no Of general ignorance,— it must omit Real necessities, and give way the while To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd, it follows, Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,— You that will be less fearful than discreet, That love the fundamental part of state More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer A noble life before a long, and wish To jump a body with a dangerous physic That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state Of that integrity which should become't, Not having the power to do the good it would, For the in which doth control't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Has said enough.
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answerAs traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee! What should the people do with these bald tribunes? On whom depending, their obedience fails To the greater bench: in a rebellion, When what's not meet, but what must be, was law, Then were they chosen: in a better hour, Let what is meet be said it must be meet, And throw their power i' the dust.
Manifest treason!
This a consul? no.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The aediles, ho!
Let him be apprehended.
Go, call the people: [Exit AEdile] In whose name myself Attach thee as a traitorous innovator, A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee, And follow to thine answer.
Hence, old goat!
Aged sir, hands off.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bonesOut of thy garments.
Help, ye citizens!
On both sides more respect.
Here's he that would take from you all your power.
Seize him, AEdiles!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Down with him! down with him!
Weapons, weapons, weapons![They all bustle about Coriolanus]Tribunes, Patricians, Citizens, what ho! Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens!
Peace, peace, peace! Stay, hold, peace!
What is about to be? I am out of breath;Confusion's near; I cannot speak. You, tribunesTo the people! Coriolanus, patience!Speak, good Sicinius.
Hear me, people; peace!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.
You are at point to lose your liberties:Marcius would have all from you; Marcius,Whom late you have named for consul.
Fie, fie, fie!This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
What is the city but the people?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True,The people are the city.
By the consent of all, we were establish'dThe people's magistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to do.
That is the way to lay the city flat;To bring the roof to the foundation,And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,In heaps and piles of ruin.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This deserves death.
Or let us stand to our authority, Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce, Upon the part o' the people, in whose power We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy Of present death.
Therefore lay hold of him;Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thenceInto destruction cast him.
AEdiles, seize him!
Yield, Marcius, yield!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear me one word;Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
Peace, peace!
[To BRUTUS] Be that you seem, truly your country's friend, And temperately proceed to what you would Thus violently redress.
Sir, those cold ways, That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him, And bear him to the rock.
No, I'll die here. [Drawing his sword] There's some among you have beheld me fighting:Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Lay hands upon him.
Help Marcius, help,You that be noble; help him, young and old!
Down with him, down with him!
Go, get you to your house; be gone, away!All will be naught else.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Get you gone.
Stand fast;We have as many friends as enemies.
Sham it be put to that?
The gods forbid!I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;Leave us to cure this cause.
For 'tis a sore upon us,You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, sir, along with us.
I would they were barbarians—as they are,Though in Rome litter'd—not Romans—as they are not,Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol—
Be gone;Put not your worthy rage into your tongue;One time will owe another.
On fair groundI could beat forty of them.
I could myself Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the two tribunes: But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic; And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands Against a falling fabric. Will you hence, Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend Like interrupted waters and o'erbear What they are used to bear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, be gone:I'll try whether my old wit be in requestWith those that have but little: this must be patch'dWith cloth of any colour.
Nay, come away.
This man has marr'd his fortune.
His nature is too noble for the world: He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth: What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; And, being angry, does forget that ever He heard the name of death.
Here's goodly work!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would they were abed!
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!Could he not speak 'em fair?
Where is this viperThat would depopulate the city andBe every man himself?
You worthy tribunes,—
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law, And therefore law shall scorn him further trial Than the severity of the public power Which he so sets at nought.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He shall well knowThe noble tribunes are the people's mouths,And we their hands.
He shall, sure on't.
Sir, sir,—
Peace!
Do not cry havoc, where you should but huntWith modest warrant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, how comes't that youHave holp to make this rescue?
Hear me speak:As I do know the consul's worthiness,So can I name his faults,—
Consul! what consul?
The consul Coriolanus.
He consul!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no, no, no, no.
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, I may be heard, I would crave a word or two; The which shall turn you to no further harm Than so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then; For we are peremptory to dispatch This viperous traitor: to eject him hence Were but one danger, and to keep him here Our certain death: therefore it is decreed He dies to-night.
Now the good gods forbid That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude Towards her deserved children is enroll'd In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam Should now eat up her own!
He's a disease that must be cut away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, he's a limb that has but a disease; Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy. What has he done to Rome that's worthy death? Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost— Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath, By many an ounce— he dropp'd it for his country; And what is left, to lose it by his country, Were to us all, that do't and suffer it, A brand to the end o' the world.
This is clean kam.
Merely awry: when he did love his country,It honour'd him.
The service of the footBeing once gangrened, is not then respectedFor what before it was.
We'll hear no more. Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: Lest his infection, being of catching nature, Spread further.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One word more, one word. This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process; Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, And sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so,—
What do ye talk?Have we not had a taste of his obedience?Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd In bolted language; meal and bran together He throws without distinction. Give me leave, I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him Where he shall answer, by a lawful form, In peace, to his utmost peril.
Noble tribunes, It is the humane way: the other course Will prove too bloody, and the end of it Unknown to the beginning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Noble Menenius,Be you then as the people's officer.Masters, lay down your weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceedIn our first way.
I'll bring him to you. [To the senators] Let me desire your company. He must come, or what is worst will follow.
Pray you, let's to him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let them puff all about mine ears, present me Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels, Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock, That the precipitation might down stretch Below the beam of sight, yet will I still Be thus to them.
You do the nobler.
I muse my mother Does not approve me further, who was wont To call them woollen vassals, things created To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder, When one but of my ordinance stood up To speak of peace or war.
I talk of you: Why did you wish me milder? would you have me False to my nature? Rather say I play The man I am.
O, sir, sir, sir,I would have had you put your power well on,Before you had worn it out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let go.
You might have been enough the man you are, With striving less to be so; lesser had been The thwartings of your dispositions, if You had not show'd them how ye were disposed Ere they lack'd power to cross you.
Let them hang.
Ay, and burn too.
Come, come, you have been too rough, somethingtoo rough;You must return and mend it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There's no remedy;Unless, by not so doing, our good cityCleave in the midst, and perish.
Pray, be counsell'd: I have a heart as little apt as yours, But yet a brain that leads my use of anger To better vantage.
Well said, noble woman? Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic For the whole state, I would put mine armour on, Which I can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the tribunes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, what then? what then?
Repent what you have spoke.
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;Must I then do't to them?
You are too absolute; Though therein you can never be too noble, But when extremities speak. I have heard you say, Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me, In peace what each of them by the other lose, That they combine not there.
Tush, tush!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A good demand.
If it be honour in your wars to seem The same you are not, which, for your best ends, You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse, That it shall hold companionship in peace With honour, as in war, since that to both It stands in like request?
Why force you this?
Because that now it lies you on to speak To the people; not by your own instruction, Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, But with such words that are but rooted in Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables Of no allowance to your bosom's truth. Now, this no more dishonours you at all Than to take in a town with gentle words, Which else would put you to your fortune and The hazard of much blood. I would dissemble with my nature where My fortunes and my friends at stake required I should do so in honour: I am in this, Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles; And you will rather show our general louts How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em, For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard Of what that want might ruin.
Noble lady! Come, go with us; s peak fair: you may salve so, Not what is dangerous present, but the loss Of what is past.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee now, my son, Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand; And thus far having stretch'd it—here be with them— Thy knee bussing the stones— for in such business Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant More learned than the ears— waving thy head, Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart, Now humble as the ripest mulberry That will not hold the handling: or say to them, Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess, Were fit for thee to use as they to claim, In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far As thou hast power and person.
This but done, Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours; For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free As words to little purpose.
Prithee now, Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.
I have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fitYou make strong party, or defend yourselfBy calmness or by absence: all's in anger.
Only fair speech.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think 'twill serve, if heCan thereto frame his spirit.
He must, and willPrithee now, say you will, and go about it.
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce? Must I with base tongue give my noble heart A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't: Yet, were there but this single plot to lose, This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it And throw't against the wind. To the market-place! You have put me now to such a part which never I shall discharge to the life.
Come, come, we'll prompt you.
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said My praises made thee first a soldier, so, To have my praise for this, perform a part Thou hast not done before.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I must do't: Away, my disposition, and possess me Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd, Which quired with my drum, into a pipe Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees, Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his That hath received an alms! I will not do't, Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth And by my body's action teach my mind A most inherent baseness.
At thy choice, then: To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, But owe thy pride thyself.
Pray, be content: Mother, I am going to the market-place; Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves, Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going: Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul; Or never trust to what my tongue can do I' the way of flattery further.
Do your will.
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself To answer mildly; for they are prepared With accusations, as I hear, more strong Than are upon you yet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:Let them accuse me by invention, IWill answer in mine honour.
Ay, but mildly.
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!
In this point charge him home, that he affects Tyrannical power: if he evade us there, Enforce him with his envy to the people, And that the spoil got on the Antiates Was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's coming.
How accompanied?
With old Menenius, and those senatorsThat always favour'd him.
Have you a catalogueOf all the voices that we have procuredSet down by the poll?
I have; 'tis ready.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have you collected them by tribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the people hither; And when they bear me say 'It shall be so I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them If I say fine, cry 'Fine;' if death, cry 'Death.' Insisting on the old prerogative And power i' the truth o' the cause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they have begun to cry, Let them not cease, but with a din confused Enforce the present execution Of what we chance to sentence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very well.
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,When we shall hap to give 't them.
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used Ever to conquer, and to have his worth Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks What's in his heart; and that is there which looks With us to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Calmly, I do beseech you.
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's! Throng our large temples with the shows of peace, And not our streets with war!
Amen, amen.
A noble wish.
Draw near, ye people.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!
First, hear me speak.
Well, say. Peace, ho!
Shall I be charged no further than this present?Must all determine here?
I do demand, If you submit you to the people's voices, Allow their officers and are content To suffer lawful censure for such faults As shall be proved upon you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am content.
Lo, citizens, he says he is content: The warlike service he has done, consider; think Upon the wounds his body bears, which show Like graves i' the holy churchyard.
Scratches with briers,Scars to move laughter only.
Consider further, That when he speaks not like a citizen, You find him like a soldier: do not take His rougher accents for malicious sounds, But, as I say, such as become a soldier, Rather than envy you.
Well, well, no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter That being pass'd for consul with full voice, I am so dishonour'd that the very hour You take it off again?
Answer to us.
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.
We charge you, that you have contrived to take From Rome all season'd office and to wind Yourself into a power tyrannical; For which you are a traitor to the people.
How! traitor!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, temperately; your promise.
The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people! Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune! Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say 'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free As I do pray the gods.
Mark you this, people?
To the rock, to the rock with him!
Peace! We need not put new matter to his charge: What you have seen him do and heard him speak, Beating your officers, cursing yourselves, Opposing laws with strokes and here defying Those whose great power must try him; even this, So criminal and in such capital kind, Deserves the extremest death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But since he hathServed well for Rome,—
What do you prate of service?
I talk of that, that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that you made your mother?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know, I pray you,—
I know no further: Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death, Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger But with a grain a day, I would not buy Their mercy at the price of one fair word; Nor cheque my courage for what they can give, To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'
For that he has, As much as in him lies, from time to time Envied against the people, seeking means To pluck away their power, as now at last Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers That do distribute it; in the name o' the people And in the power of us the tribunes, we, Even from this instant, banish him our city, In peril of precipitation From off the rock Tarpeian never more To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name, I say it shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away:He's banish'd, and it shall be so.
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's sentenced; no more hearing.
Let me speak: I have been consul, and can show for Rome Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love My country's good with a respect more tender, More holy and profound, than mine own life, My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase, And treasure of my loins; then if I would Speak that,—
We know your drift: speak what?
There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,As enemy to the people and his country:It shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize As the dead carcasses of unburied men That do corrupt my air, I banish you; And here remain with your uncertainty! Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts! Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, Fan you into despair! Have the power still To banish your defenders; till at length Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels, Making not reservation of yourselves, Still your own foes, deliver you as most Abated captives to some nation That won you without blows! Despising, For you, the city, thus I turn my back: There is a world elsewhere.
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him, As he hath followed you, with all despite; Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard Attend us through the city.
Come, come; let's see him out at gates; come.The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother, Where is your ancient courage? you were used To say extremity was the trier of spirits; That common chances common men could bear; That when the sea was calm all boats alike Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows, When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves A noble cunning: you were used to load me With precepts that would make invincible The heart that conn'd them.
O heavens! O heavens!
Nay! prithee, woman,—
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,And occupations perish!
What, what, what! I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother. Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, If you had been the wife of Hercules, Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved Your husband so much sweat. Cominius, Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother: I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius, Thy tears are salter than a younger man's, And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general, I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women 'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well My hazards still have been your solace: and Believe't not lightly— though I go alone, Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen— your son Will or exceed the common or be caught With cautelous baits and practise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My first son. Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius With thee awhile: determine on some course, More than a wild exposture to each chance That starts i' the way before thee.
O the gods!
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send O'er the vast world to seek a single man, And lose advantage, which doth ever cool I' the absence of the needer.
Fare ye well: Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate. Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and My friends of noble touch, when I am forth, Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come. While I remain above the ground, you shall Hear from me still, and never of me aught But what is like me formerly.
That's worthily As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep. If I could shake off but one seven years From these old arms and legs, by the good gods, I'ld with thee every foot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me thy hand: Come.
Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further.The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sidedIn his behalf.
Now we have shown our power,Let us seem humbler after it is doneThan when it was a-doing.
Bid them home:Say their great enemy is gone, and theyStand in their ancient strength.
Dismiss them home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes his mother.
Let's not meet her.
Why?
They say she's mad.
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the godsRequite your love!
Peace, peace; be not so loud.
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,—Nay, and you shall hear some. [TO BRUTUS] Will you be gone?
[To SICINIUS] You shall stay too: I would I had the powerTo say so to my husband.
Are you mankind?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool. Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship To banish him that struck more blows for Rome Than thou hast spoken words?
O blessed heavens!
More noble blows than ever thou wise words; And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what; yet go: Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him, His good sword in his hand.
What then?
What then!He'ld make an end of thy posterity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bastards and all.Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
Come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to his countryAs he began, and not unknit himselfThe noble knot he made.
I would he had.
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble: Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth As I can of those mysteries which heaven Will not have earth to know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray, let us go.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone: You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:— As far as doth the Capitol exceed The meanest house in Rome, so far my son— This lady's husband here, this, do you see— Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.
Well, well, we'll leave you.
Why stay we to be baitedWith one that wants her wits?
Take my prayers with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would the gods had nothing else to do But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em But once a-day, it would unclog my heart Of what lies heavy to't.
You have told them home;And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?
Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself, And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go: Leave this faint puling and lament as I do, In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.
Fie, fie, fie!
I know you well, sir, and you knowme: your name, I think, is Adrian.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.
I am a Roman; and my services are,as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?
Nicanor? no.
The same, sir.
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state, to find you out there: you have well saved me a day's journey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; thepeople against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks notso: they are in a most warlike preparation, andhope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again: for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment of that worthy Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking out.
Coriolanus banished!
Banished, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thusaccidentally to encounter you: you have ended mybusiness, and I will merrily accompany you home.
I shall, between this and supper, tell you moststrange things from Rome; all tending to the good oftheir adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?
A most royal one; the centurions and their charges,distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am theman, I think, that shall set them in present action.So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
You take my part from me, sir; I have the most causeto be glad of yours.
Well, let us go together.
A goodly city is this Antium. City, 'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not, Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones In puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And you.
Direct me, if it be your will,Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?
He is, and feasts the nobles of the stateAt his house this night.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This, here before you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thank you, sir: farewell.
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn, Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise, Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love Unseparable, shall within this hour, On a dissension of a doit, break out To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes, Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep, To take the one the other, by some chance, Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends And interjoin their issues. So with me: My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me, He does fair justice; if he give me way, I'll do his country service.
Wine, wine, wine! What serviceis here! I think our fellows are asleep.
Where's Cotus? my master callsfor him. Cotus!
A goodly house: the feast smells well; but IAppear not like a guest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would you have, friend? whence are you?Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.
I have deserved no better entertainment,In being Coriolanus.
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in hishead; that he gives entrance to such companions?Pray, get you out.
Away!
Away! get you away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now thou'rt troublesome.
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.
What fellow's this?
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get himout of the house: prithee, call my master to him.
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoidthe house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.
What are you?
A gentleman.
A marvellous poor one.
True, so I am.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some otherstation; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what astrange guest he has here.
And I shall.
Where dwellest thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Under the canopy.
Under the canopy!
Ay.
Where's that?
I' the city of kites and crows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!Then thou dwellest with daws too?
No, I serve not thy master.
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?
Ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thymistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thytrencher, hence!
Where is this fellow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but fordisturbing the lords within.
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?
If, Tullus,
What is thy name?
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,And harsh in sound to thine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, what's thy name? Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn. Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'stthou me yet?
I know thee not: thy name?
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done To thee particularly and to all the Volsces Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service, The extreme dangers and the drops of blood Shed for my thankless country are requited But with that surname; a good memory, And witness of the malice and displeasure Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains; The cruelty and envy of the people, Permitted by our dastard nobles, who Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest; And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope— Mistake me not—to save my life, for if I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite, To be full quit of those my banishers, Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight, And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it That my revengeful services may prove As benefits to thee, for I will fight Against my canker'd country with the spleen Of all the under fiends. But if so be Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am Longer to live most weary, and present My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice; Which not to cut would show thee but a fool, Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate, Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast, And cannot live but to thy shame, unless It be to do thee service.
O Marcius, Marcius! Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter Should from yond cloud speak divine things, And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine Mine arms about that body, where against My grained ash an hundred times hath broke And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip The anvil of my sword, and do contest As hotly and as nobly with thy love As ever in ambitious strength I did Contend against thy valour. Know thou first, I loved the maid I married; never man Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here, Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart Than when I first my wedded mistress saw Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee, We have a power on foot; and I had purpose Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out Twelve several times, and I have nightly since Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me; We have been down together in my sleep, Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat, And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius, Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all From twelve to seventy, and pouring war Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome, Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in, And take our friendly senators by the hands; Who now are here, taking their leaves of me, Who am prepared against your territories, Though not for Rome itself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You bless me, gods!
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have The leading of thine own revenges, take The one half of my commission; and set down— As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st Thy country's strength and weakness,— thine own ways; Whether to knock against the gates of Rome, Or rudely visit them in parts remote, To fright them, ere destroy. But come in: Let me commend thee first to those that shall Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes! And more a friend than e'er an enemy; Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!
Here's a strange alteration!
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him witha cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made afalse report of him.
What an arm he has! he turned me about with hisfinger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I knew by his face that there was something inhim: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,—Icannot tell how to term it.
He had so; looking as it were—would I were hanged,but I thought there was more in him than I could think.
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarestman i' the world.
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.
Who, my master?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, it's no matter for that.
Worth six on him.
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be thegreater soldier.
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
Ay, and for an assault too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O slaves, I can tell you news,—news, you rascals!
What, what, what? let's partake.
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had aslieve be a condemned man.
Wherefore? wherefore?
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,Caius Marcius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why do you say 'thwack our general '?
I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was alwaysgood enough for him.
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever toohard for him; I have heard him say so himself.
He was too hard for him directly, to say the trothon't: before Corioli he scotched him and notchedhim like a carbon ado.
An he had been cannibally given, he might havebroiled and eaten him too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, more of thy news?
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no question asked him by any of the senators, but they stand bald before him: our general himself makes a mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.
Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
Directitude! what's that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.
But when goes this forward?
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increasetailors, and breed ballad-makers.
Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said tobe a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is agreat maker of cuckolds.
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.
Reason; because they then less need one another.The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheapas Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.
In, in, in, in!
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him; His remedies are tame i' the present peace And quietness of the people, which before Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends Blush that the world goes well, who rather had, Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see Our tradesmen with in their shops and going About their functions friendly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We stood to't in good time.
Is this Menenius?
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.
Hail sir!
Hail to you both!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your Coriolanus Is not much miss'd, but with his friends: The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, Were he more angry at it.
All's well; and might have been much better, ifHe could have temporized.
Where is he, hear you?
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wifeHear nothing from him.
The gods preserve you both!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God-den, our neighbours.
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,Are bound to pray for you both.
Live, and thrive!
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd CoriolanusHad loved you as we did.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now the gods keep you!
Farewell, farewell.
This is a happier and more comely timeThan when these fellows ran about the streets,Crying confusion.
Caius Marcius was A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent, O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, Self-loving,—
And affecting one sole throne,Without assistance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think not so.
We should by this, to all our lamentation,If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
The gods have well prevented it, and RomeSits safe and still without him.
Worthy tribunes, There is a slave, whom we have put in prison, Reports, the Volsces with two several powers Are enter'd in the Roman territories, And with the deepest malice of the war Destroy what lies before 'em.
'Tis Aufidius, Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment, Thrusts forth his horns again into the world; Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome, And durst not once peep out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, what talk youOf Marcius?
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot beThe Volsces dare break with us.
Cannot be! We have record that very well it can, And three examples of the like have been Within my age. But reason with the fellow, Before you punish him, where he heard this, Lest you shall chance to whip your information And beat the messenger who bids beware Of what is to be dreaded.
Tell not me:I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The nobles in great earnestness are goingAll to the senate-house: some news is comeThat turns their countenances.
'Tis this slave;—Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:—his raising;Nothing but his report.
Yes, worthy sir,The slave's report is seconded; and more,More fearful, is deliver'd.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of many mouths— How probable I do not know— that Marcius, Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome, And vows revenge as spacious as between The young'st and oldest thing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is most likely!
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wishGood Marcius home again.
The very trick on't.
This is unlikely:He and Aufidius can no more atoneThan violentest contrariety.
You are sent for to the senate: A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius Associated with Aufidius, rages Upon our territories; and have already O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took What lay before them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, you have made good work!
What news? what news?
You have holp to ravish your own daughters andTo melt the city leads upon your pates,To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,—
What's the news? what's the news?
Your temples burned in their cement, andYour franchises, whereon you stood, confinedInto an auger's bore.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray now, your news?You have made fair work, I fear me.—Pray, your news?—If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,—
If! He is their god: he leads them like a thing Made by some other deity than nature, That shapes man better; and they follow him, Against us brats, with no less confidence Than boys pursuing summer butterflies, Or butchers killing flies.
You have made good work, You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and The breath of garlic-eaters!
He will shakeYour Rome about your ears.
As HerculesDid shake down mellow fruit.You have made fair work!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But is this true, sir?
Ay; and you'll look pale Before you find it other. All the regions Do smilingly revolt; and who resist Are mock'd for valiant ignorance, And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him? Your enemies and his find something in him.
We are all undone, unlessThe noble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it? The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people Deserve such pity of him as the wolf Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even As those should do that had deserved his hate, And therein show'd like enemies.
'Tis true: If he were putting to my house the brand That should consume it, I have not the face To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands, You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have broughtA trembling upon Rome, such as was neverSo incapable of help.
Say not we brought it.
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beastsAnd cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,Who did hoot him out o' the city.
But I fear They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius, The second name of men, obeys his points As if he were his officer: desperation Is all the policy, strength and defence, That Rome can make against them.
Here come the clusters. And is Aufidius with him? You are they That made the air unwholesome, when you cast Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming; And not a hair upon a soldier's head Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs As you threw caps up will he tumble down, And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter; if he could burn us all into one coal, We have deserved it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, we hear fearful news.
For mine own part,When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.
And so did I.
And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.
Ye re goodly things, you voices!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have madeGood work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?
O, ay, what else?
Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd: These are a side that would be glad to have This true which they so seem to fear. Go home, And show no sign of fear.
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banishedhim.
So did we all. But, come, let's home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not like this news.
Nor I.
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealthWould buy this for a lie!
Pray, let us go.
Do they still fly to the Roman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat, Their talk at table, and their thanks at end; And you are darken'd in this action, sir, Even by your own.
I cannot help it now, Unless, by using means, I lame the foot Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier, Even to my person, than I thought he would When first I did embrace him: yet his nature In that's no changeling; and I must excuse What cannot be amended.
Yet I wish, sir,— I mean for your particular,— you had not Join'd in commission with him; but either Had borne the action of yourself, or else To him had left it solely.
I understand thee well; and be thou sure, when he shall come to his account, he knows not What I can urge against him. Although it seems, And so he thinks, and is no less apparent To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly. And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state, Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone That which shall break his neck or hazard mine, Whene'er we come to our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All places yield to him ere he sits down; And the nobility of Rome are his: The senators and patricians love him too: The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it By sovereignty of nature. First he was A noble servant to them; but he could not Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride, Which out of daily fortune ever taints The happy man; whether defect of judgment, To fail in the disposing of those chances Which he was lord of; or whether nature, Not to be other than one thing, not moving From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace Even with the same austerity and garb As he controll'd the war; but one of these— As he hath spices of them all, not all, For I dare so far free him— made him fear'd, So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit, To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues Lie in the interpretation of the time: And power, unto itself most commendable, Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair To extol what it hath done. One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail; Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail. Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine, Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said Which was sometime his general; who loved him In a most dear particular. He call'd me father: But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him; A mile before his tent fall down, and knee The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me by my name: I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops That we have bled together. Coriolanus He would not answer to: forbad all names; He was a kind of nothing, titleless, Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire Of burning Rome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, so: you have made good work!A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,To make coals cheap,—a noble memory!
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon When it was less expected: he replied, It was a bare petition of a state To one whom they had punish'd.
Very well:Could he say less?
I offer'd to awaken his regard For's private friends: his answer to me was, He could not stay to pick them in a pile Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly, For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt, And still to nose the offence.
For one poor grain or two! I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child, And this brave fellow too, we are the grains: You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid In this so never-needed help, yet do not Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue, More than the instant army we can make, Might stop our countryman.
No, I'll not meddle.
Pray you, go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your love can doFor Rome, towards Marcius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, and say that Marcius Return me, as Cominius is return'd, Unheard; what then? But as a discontented friend, grief-shot With his unkindness? say't be so?
Yet your good willmust have that thanks from Rome, after the measureAs you intended well.
I'll undertake 't: I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me. He was not taken well; he had not dined: The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then We pout upon the morning, are unapt To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd These and these conveyances of our blood With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him Till he be dieted to my request, And then I'll set upon him.
You know the very road into his kindness,And cannot lose your way.
Good faith, I'll prove him,Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledgeOf my success.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He'll never hear him.
Not?
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him; 'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do, He sent in writing after me; what he would not, Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions: So that all hope is vain. Unless his noble mother, and his wife; Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence, And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
Stay: whence are you?
Stand, and go back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave,I am an officer of state, and comeTo speak with Coriolanus.
From whence?
From Rome.
You may not pass, you must return: our generalWill no more hear from thence.
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire beforeYou'll speak with Coriolanus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my friends, If you have heard your general talk of Rome, And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks, My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your nameIs not here passable.
I tell thee, fellow, The general is my lover: I have been The book of his good acts, whence men have read His name unparallel'd, haply amplified; For I have ever verified my friends, Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes, Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground, I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow, I must have leave to pass.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,always factionary on the party of your general.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say youhave, I am one that, telling true under him, mustsay, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would notspeak with him till after dinner.
You are a Roman, are you?
I am, as thy general is.
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived; therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he woulduse me with estimation.
Come, my captain knows you not.
I mean, thy general.
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lestI let forth your half-pint of blood; back,—that'sthe utmost of your having: back.
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's the matter?
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you: You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment with him, if thou standest not i' the state of hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee. [To CORIOLANUS] The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity and love thee no worse than thy old father Menenius does. O my son, my son! Thou art preparing fire for us. Look thee, here's water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to thee but, being assured none but myself could move thee, I have been blown out of gates with sighs and conjure thee to pardon Rome and they petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy wrath and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here— this, who like a block hath denied my access to thee.
Away!
How! away!
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs Are servanted to others: though I owe My revenge properly, my remission lies In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar, Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone. Mine ears against your suits are stronger than Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee, Take this along; I writ it for thy sake And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius, I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius, Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You keep a constant temper.
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
'Tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know theway home again.
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping yourgreatness back?
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I neither care for the world nor your general: for such things as you, I can scarce think there's any, ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another: let your general do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and your misery increase with your age! I say to you, as I was said to, Away!
A noble fellow, I warrant him.
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, theoak not to be wind-shaken.
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow Set down our host. My partner in this action, You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly I have borne this business.
Only their ends You have respected; stopp'd your ears against The general suit of Rome; never admitted A private whisper, no, not with such friends That thought them sure of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This last old man, Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome, Loved me above the measure of a father; Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge Was to send him; for whose old love I have, Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd The first conditions, which they did refuse And cannot now accept; to grace him only That thought he could do more, a very little I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this? Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection! All bond and privilege of nature, break! Let it be virtuous to be obstinate. What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes, Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows; As if Olympus to a molehill should In supplication nod: and my young boy Hath an aspect of intercession, which Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, As if a man were author of himself And knew no other kin.
My lord and husband!
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changedMakes you think so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Like a dull actor now, I have forgot my part, and I am out, Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh, Forgive my tyranny; but do not say For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate, And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;
O, stand up blest! Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, I kneel before thee; and unproperly Show duty, as mistaken all this while Between the child and parent.
What is this? Your knees to me? to your corrected son? Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun; Murdering impossibility, to make What cannot be, slight work.
Thou art my warrior;I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
The noble sister of Publicola, The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle That's curdied by the frost from purest snow And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is a poor epitome of yours,Which by the interpretation of full timeMay show like all yourself.
The god of soldiers, With the consent of supreme Jove, inform Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, And saving those that eye thee!
Your knee, sirrah.
That's my brave boy!
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,Are suitors to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you, peace: Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: The thing I have forsworn to grant may never Be held by you denials. Do not bid me Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not To ally my rages and revenges with Your colder reasons.
O, no more, no more! You have said you will not grant us any thing; For we have nothing else to ask, but that Which you deny already: yet we will ask; That, if you fail in our request, the blame May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'llHear nought from Rome in private. Your request?
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment And state of bodies would bewray what life We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself How more unfortunate than all living women Are we come hither: since that thy sight, which should Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow; Making the mother, wife and child to see The son, the husband and the father tearing His country's bowels out. And to poor we Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort That all but we enjoy; for how can we, Alas, how can we for our country pray. Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, Our comfort in the country. We must find An evident calamity, though we had Our wish, which side should win: for either thou Must, as a foreign recreant, be led With manacles thorough our streets, or else triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, And bear the palm for having bravely shed Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son, I purpose not to wait on fortune till These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee Rather to show a noble grace to both parts Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner March to assault thy country than to tread— Trust to't, thou shalt not— on thy mother's womb, That brought thee to this world.
Ay, and mine,That brought you forth this boy, to keep your nameLiving to time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A' shall not tread on me;I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.I have sat too long.
Nay, go not from us thus. If it were so that our request did tend To save the Romans, thereby to destroy The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans, 'This we received;' and each in either side Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son, The end of war's uncertain, but this certain, That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses; Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble, But with his last attempt he wiped it out; Destroy'd his country, and his name remains To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son: Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour, To imitate the graces of the gods; To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak? Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you: He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy: Perhaps thy childishness will move him more Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust, And spurn me back: but if it be not so, Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, That thou restrain'st from me the duty which To a mother's part belongs. He turns away: Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees. To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end; This is the last: so we will home to Rome, And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's: This boy, that cannot tell what he would have But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, Does reason our petition with more strength Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go: This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; His wife is in Corioli and his child Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch: I am hush'd until our city be a-fire, And then I'll speak a little.
O mother, mother! What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope, The gods look down, and this unnatural scene They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O! You have won a happy victory to Rome; But, for your son,— believe it, O, believe it, Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, If not most mortal to him. But, let it come. Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius, Were you in my stead, would you have heard A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?
I was moved withal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I dare be sworn you were: And, sir, it is no little thing to make Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir, What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part, I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you, Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!
[Aside] I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honour At difference in thee: out of that I'll work Myself a former fortune.
Ay, by and by; But we will drink together; and you shall bear A better witness back than words, which we, On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd. Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve To have a temple built you: all the swords In Italy, and her confederate arms, Could not have made this peace.
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yondcorner-stone?
Why, what of that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him. But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.
Is't possible that so short a time can alter thecondition of a man!
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a creeping thing.
He loved his mother dearly.
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that shall our poor city find: and all this is long of you.
The gods be good unto us!
No, in such a case the gods will not be good untous. When we banished him, we respected not them;and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house: The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune And hale him up and down, all swearing, if The Roman ladies bring not comfort home, They'll give him death by inches.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's the news?
Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd, The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone: A merrier day did never yet greet Rome, No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
Friend,Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?
As certain as I know the sun is fire: Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it? Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide, As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,Make the sun dance. Hark you!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is good news: I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, A city full; of tribunes, such as you, A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day: This morning for ten thousand of your throats I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,Accept my thankfulness.
Sir, we have allGreat cause to give great thanks.
They are near the city?
Almost at point to enter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will meet them,And help the joy.
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome! Call all your tribes together, praise the gods, And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them: Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius, Repeal him with the welcome of his mother; Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here: Deliver them this paper: having read it, Bid them repair to the market place; where I, Even in theirs and in the commons' ears, Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse The city ports by this hath enter'd a nd Intends to appear before the people, hoping To purge himself with words: dispatch.
Most welcome!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How is it with our general?
Even soAs with a man by his own alms empoison'd,And with his charity slain.
Most noble sir, If you do hold the same intent wherein You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you Of your great danger.
Sir, I cannot tell:We must proceed as we do find the people.
The people will remain uncertain whilst'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of eitherMakes the survivor heir of all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it; And my pretext to strike at him admits A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd, He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery, Seducing so my friends; and, to this end, He bow'd his nature, never known before But to be rough, unswayable and free.
Sir, his stoutnessWhen he did stand for consul, which he lostBy lack of stooping,—
That I would have spoke of: Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth; Presented to my knife his throat: I took him; Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way In all his own desires; nay, let him choose Out of my files, his projects to accomplish, My best and freshest men; served his designments In mine own person; holp to reap the fame Which he did end all his; and took some pride To do myself this wrong: till, at the last, I seem'd his follower, not partner, and He waged me with his countenance, as if I had been mercenary.
So he did, my lord: The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last, When he had carried Rome and that we look'd For no less spoil than glory,—
There was it: For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him. At a few drops of women's rheum, which are As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour Of our great action: therefore shall he die, And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your native town you enter'd like a post,And had no welcomes home: but he returns,Splitting the air with noise.
And patient fools,Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tearWith giving him glory.
Therefore, at your vantage, Ere he express himself, or move the people With what he would say, let him feel your sword, Which we will second. When he lies along, After your way his tale pronounced shall bury His reasons with his body.
Say no more:Here come the lords.
You are most welcome home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have not deserved it.But, worthy lords, have you with heed perusedWhat I have written to you?
We have.
And grieve to hear't. What faults he made before the last, I think Might have found easy fines: but there to end Where he was to begin and give away The benefit of our levies, answering us With our own charge, making a treaty where There was a yielding,— this admits no excuse.
He approaches: you shall hear him.
Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier, No more infected with my country's love Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting Under your great command. You are to know That prosperously I have attempted and With bloody passage led your wars even to The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home Do more than counterpoise a full third part The charges of the action. We have made peace With no less honour to the Antiates Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver, Subscribed by the consuls and patricians, Together with the seal o' the senate, what We have compounded on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Read it not, noble lords;But tell the traitor, in the high'st degreeHe hath abused your powers.
Traitor! how now!
Ay, traitor, Marcius!
Marcius!
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name Coriolanus in Corioli? You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously He has betray'd your business, and given up, For certain drops of salt, your city Rome, I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother; Breaking his oath and resolution like A twist of rotten silk, never admitting Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears He whined and roar'd away your victory, That pages blush'd at him and men of heart Look'd wondering each at other.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear'st thou, Mars?
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!
Ha!
No more.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave! Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords, Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion— Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that Must bear my beating to his grave— shall join To thrust the lie unto him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, both, and hear me speak.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads, Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound! If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there, That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli: Alone I did it. Boy!
Why, noble lords, Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 'Fore your own eyes and ears?
Let him die for't.
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'dmy son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousinMarcus.' 'He killed my father.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, ho! no outrage: peace! The man is noble and his fame folds-in This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius, And trouble not the peace.
O that I had him,With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,To use my lawful sword!
Insolent villain!
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
Hold, hold, hold, hold!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My noble masters, hear me speak.
O Tullus,—
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;Put up your swords.
My lords, when you shall know— as in this rage, Provoked by him, you cannot— the great danger Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours To call me to your senate, I'll deliver Myself your loyal servant, or endure Your heaviest censure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bear from hence his body;And mourn you for him: let him be regardedAs the most noble corse that ever heraldDid follow to his urn.
His own impatienceTakes from Aufidius a great part of blame.Let's make the best of it.
My rage is gone; And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up. Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one. Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully: Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, Which to this hour bewail the injury, Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.
You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods No more obey the heavens than our courtiers Still seem as does the king.
But what's the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom, whom He purposed to his wife's sole son—a widow That late he married—hath referr'd herself Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: she's wedded; Her husband banish'd; she imprison'd: all Is outward sorrow; though I think the king Be touch'd at very heart.
None but the king?
He that hath lost her too; so is the queen, That most desired the match; but not a courtier, Although they wear their faces to the bent Of the king's look's, hath a heart that is not Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath miss'd the princess is a thing Too bad for bad report: and he that hath her— I mean, that married her, alack, good man! And therefore banish'd—is a creature such As, to seek through the regions of the earth For one his like, there would be something failing In him that should compare. I do not think So fair an outward and such stuff within Endows a man but he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You speak him far.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,Crush him together rather than unfoldHis measure duly.
What's his name and birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: his father Was call'd Sicilius, who did join his honour Against the Romans with Cassibelan, But had his titles by Tenantius whom He served with glory and admired success, So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus; And had, besides this gentleman in question, Two other sons, who in the wars o' the time Died with their swords in hand; for which their father, Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow That he quit being, and his gentle lady, Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased As he was born. The king he takes the babe To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus, Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber, Puts to him all the learnings that his time Could make him the receiver of; which he took, As we do air, fast as 'twas minister'd, And in's spring became a harvest, lived in court— Which rare it is to do—most praised, most loved, A sample to the youngest, to the more mature A glass that feated them, and to the graver A child that guided dotards; to his mistress, For whom he now is banish'd, her own price Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue; By her election may be truly read What kind of man he is.
I honour himEven out of your report. But, pray you, tell me,Is she sole child to the king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His only child. He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing, Mark it: the eldest of them at three years old, I' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a king's children should be so convey'd,So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,That could not trace them!
Howsoe'er 'tis strange,Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at,Yet is it true, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do well believe you.
We must forbear: here comes the gentleman,The queen, and princess.
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter, After the slander of most stepmothers, Evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner, but Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus, So soon as I can win the offended king, I will be known your advocate: marry, yet The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience Your wisdom may inform you.
Please your highness,I will from hence to-day.
You know the peril. I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king Hath charged you should not speak together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband, I something fear my father's wrath; but nothing— Always reserved my holy duty—what His rage can do on me: you must be gone; And I shall here abide the hourly shot Of angry eyes, not comforted to live, But that there is this jewel in the world That I may see again.
My queen! my mistress! O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause To be suspected of more tenderness Than doth become a man. I will remain The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth: My residence in Rome at one Philario's, Who to my father was a friend, to me Known but by letter: thither write, my queen, And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send, Though ink be made of gall.
Be brief, I pray you:If the king come, I shall incur I know notHow much of his displeasure.
Yet I'll move himTo walk this way: I never do him wrong,But he does buy my injuries, to be friends;Pays dear for my offenses.
Should we be taking leaveAs long a term as yet we have to live,The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, stay a little: Were you but riding forth to air yourself, Such parting were too petty. Look here, love; This diamond was my mother's: take it, heart; But keep it till you woo another wife, When Imogen is dead.
How, how! another? You gentle gods, give me but this I have, And sear up my embracements from a next With bonds of death!
Remain, remain thou here While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest, As I my poor self did exchange for you, To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles I still win of you: for my sake wear this; It is a manacle of love; I'll place it Upon this fairest prisoner.
O the gods!When shall we see again?
Alack, the king!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou basest thing, avoid! hence, from my sight! If after this command thou fraught the court With thy unworthiness, thou diest: away! Thou'rt poison to my blood.
The gods protect you!And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.
There cannot be a pinch in deathMore sharp than this is.
O disloyal thing,That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'stA year's age on me.
I beseech you, sir, Harm not yourself with your vexation I am senseless of your wrath; a touch more rare Subdues all pangs, all fears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Past grace? Obedience?
Past hope, and in despair; that way, past grace.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle,And did avoid a puttock.
Thou took'st a beggar; wouldst have made my throneA seat for baseness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; I rather addedA lustre to it.
O thou vile one!
Sir, It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus: You bred him as my playfellow, and he is A man worth any woman, overbuys me Almost the sum he pays.
What, art thou mad?
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus Our neighbour shepherd's son!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou foolish thing!
They were again together: you have doneNot after our command. Away with her,And pen her up.
Beseech your patience. Peace, Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign, Leave us to ourselves; and make yourself some comfort Out of your best advice.
Nay, let her languish A drop of blood a day; and, being aged, Die of this folly!
Fie! you must give way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?
My lord your son drew on my master.
Ha!No harm, I trust, is done?
There might have been, But that my master rather play'd than fought And had no help of anger: they were parted By gentlemen at hand.
I am very glad on't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your son's my father's friend; he takes his part. To draw upon an exile! O brave sir! I would they were in Afric both together; Myself by with a needle, that I might prick The goer-back. Why came you from your master?
On his command: he would not suffer me To bring him to the haven; left these notes Of what commands I should be subject to, When 't pleased you to employ me.
This hath beenYour faithful servant: I dare lay mine honourHe will remain so.
I humbly thank your highness.
Pray, walk awhile.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]About some half-hour hence, I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.
Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt; the violence of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in: there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
[Aside] No, 'faith; not so much as his patience.
Hurt him! his body's a passable carcass, if he benot hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel, if it be not hurt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] His steel was in debt; it went o' thebackside the town.
The villain would not stand me.
[Aside] No; but he fled forward still, toward your face.
Stand you! You have land enough of your own: buthe added to your having; gave you some ground.
[Aside] As many inches as you have oceans. Puppies!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would they had not come between us.
[Aside] So would I, till you had measured how longa fool you were upon the ground.
And that she should love this fellow and refuse me!
[Aside] If it be a sin to make a true election, sheis damned.
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain go not together: she's a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] She shines not upon fools, lest thereflection should hurt her.
Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had been somehurt done!
[Aside] I wish not so; unless it had been the fallof an ass, which is no great hurt.
You'll go with us?
I'll attend your lordship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, come, let's go together.
Well, my lord.
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven, And question'dst every sail: if he should write And not have it, 'twere a paper lost, As offer'd mercy is. What was the last That he spake to thee?
It was his queen, his queen!
Then waved his handkerchief?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And kiss'd it, madam.
Senseless Linen! happier therein than I!And that was all?
No, madam; for so long As he could make me with this eye or ear Distinguish him from others, he did keep The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief, Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on, How swift his ship.
Thou shouldst have made himAs little as a crow, or less, ere leftTo after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would have broke mine eye-strings; crack'd them, but To look upon him, till the diminution Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle, Nay, follow'd him, till he had melted from The smallness of a gnat to air, and then Have turn'd mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio, When shall we hear from him?
Be assured, madam,With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him How I would think on him at certain hours Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear The shes of Italy should not betray Mine interest and his honour, or have charged him, At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight, To encounter me with orisons, for then I am in heaven for him; or ere I could Give him that parting kiss which I had set Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father And like the tyrannous breathing of the north Shakes all our buds from growing.
The queen, madam,Desires your highness' company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd.I will attend the queen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I shall.
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy as since he hath been allowed the name of; but I could then have looked on him without the help of admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments had been tabled by his side and I to peruse him by items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished than nowhe is with that which makes him both without and within.
I have seen him in France: we had very many therecould behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
This matter of marrying his king's daughter, whereinhe must be weighed rather by her value than his own,words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And then his banishment.
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully to extend him; be it but to fortify her judgment, which else an easy battery might lay flat, for taking a beggar without less quality. But how comes it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps acquaintance?
His father and I were soldiers together; to whom I have been often bound for no less than my life. Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your knowing, to a stranger of his quality.
I beseech you all, be better known to this gentleman; whom I commend to you as a noble friend of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
Sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness: I was glad I did atone my countryman and you; it had been pity you should have been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller; rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in my every action to be guided by others' experiences: but upon my mended judgment—if I offend not to say it is mended—my quarrel was not altogether slight.
'Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords,and by such two that would by all likelihood haveconfounded one the other, or have fallen both.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public, which may, without contradiction, suffer the report. It was much like an argument that fell out last night, where each of us fell in praise of our country mistresses; this gentleman at that time vouching—and upon warrant of bloody affirmation—his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
That lady is not now living, or this gentleman'sopinion by this worn out.
She holds her virtue still and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France, I wouldabate her nothing, though I profess myself heradorer, not her friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As fair and as good—a kind of hand-in-hand comparison—had been something too fair and too good for any lady in Britain. If she went before others I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres many I have beheld. I could not but believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More than the world enjoys.
Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she'soutprized by a trifle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.
Which the gods have given you?
Which, by their graces, I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but, you know, strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds. Your ring may be stolen too: so your brace of unprizable estimations; the one is but frail and the other casual; a cunning thief, or a that way accomplished courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail. I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves; notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us leave here, gentlemen.
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, Ithank him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first.
With five times so much conversation, I should get ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your ring; which, in my opinion, o'ervalues it something: but I make my wager rather against your confidence than her reputation: and, to bar your offence herein too, I durst attempt it against any lady in the world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion; and I doubt not you sustain what you're worthy of by your attempt.
What's that?
A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it,deserve more; a punishment too.
Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly;let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, bebetter acquainted.
Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on theapprobation of what I have spoke!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What lady would you choose to assail?
Yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring, that, commend me to the court where your lady is, with no more advantage than the opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from thence that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ringI hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.
You are afraid, and therein the wiser. If you buy ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some religion in you, that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear agraver purpose, I hope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am the master of my speeches, and would undergowhat's spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your return: let there be covenants drawn between's: my mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking: I dare you to this match: here's my ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand ducats are yours; so is your diamond too: if I come off, and leave her in such honour as you have trust in, she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are yours: provided I have your commendation for my more free entertainment.
I embrace these conditions; let us have articles betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if you make your voyage upon her and give me directly to understand you have prevailed, I am no further your enemy; she is not worth our debate: if she remain unseduced, you not making it appear otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you have made to her chastity you shall answer me with your sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your hand; a covenant: we will have these things set down by lawful counsel, and straight away for Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold and starve: I will fetch my gold and have our two wagers recorded.
Agreed.
Will this hold, think you?
Signior Iachimo will not from it.Pray, let us follow 'em.
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers;Make haste: who has the note of them?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I, madam.
Dispatch.
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your highness, ay: here they are, madam:
But I beseech your grace, without offence,— My conscience bids me ask— wherefore you have Commanded of me those most poisonous compounds, Which are the movers of a languishing death; But though slow, deadly?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I wonder, doctor, Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn'd me how To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so That our great king himself doth woo me oft For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,— Unless thou think'st me devilish—is't not meet That I did amplify my judgment in Other conclusions? I will try the forces Of these thy compounds on such creatures as We count not worth the hanging, but none human, To try the vigour of them and apply Allayments to their act, and by them gather Their several virtues and effects.
Your highness Shall from this practise but make hard your heart: Besides, the seeing these effects will be Both noisome and infectious.
O, content thee.
Here comes a flattering rascal; upon him Will I first work: he's for his master, An enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio! Doctor, your service for this time is ended; Take your own way.
[Aside] I do suspect you, madam;But you shall do no harm.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To PISANIO] Hark thee, a word.
[Aside] I do not like her. She doth think she has Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit, And will not trust one of her malice with A drug of such damn'd nature. Those she has Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile; Which first, perchance, she'll prove on cats and dogs, Then afterward up higher: but there is No danger in what show of death it makes, More than the locking-up the spirits a time, To be more fresh, reviving. She is fool'd With a most false effect; and I the truer, So to be false with her.
No further service, doctor,Until I send for thee.
I humbly take my leave.
Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time She will not quench and let instructions enter Where folly now possesses? Do thou work: When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son, I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then As great as is thy master, greater, for His fortunes all lie speechless and his name Is at last gasp: return he cannot, nor Continue where he is: to shift his being Is to exchange one misery with another, And every day that comes comes to decay A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect, To be depender on a thing that leans, Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends, So much as but to prop him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou takest up Thou know'st not what; but take it for thy labour: It is a thing I made, which hath the king Five times redeem'd from death: I do not know What is more cordial. Nay, I prethee, take it; It is an earnest of a further good That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how The case stands with her; do't as from thyself. Think what a chance thou changest on, but think Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son, Who shall take notice of thee: I'll move the king To any shape of thy preferment such As thou'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly, That set thee on to this desert, am bound To load thy merit richly. Call my women: Think on my words.
A sly and constant knave, Not to be shaked; the agent for his master And the remembrancer of her to hold The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after, Except she bend her humour, shall be assured To taste of too.
So, so: well done, well done: The violets, cowslips, and the primroses, Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio; Think on my words.
And shall do:But when to my good lord I prove untrue,I'll choke myself: there's all I'll do for you.
A father cruel, and a step-dame false; A foolish suitor to a wedded lady, That hath her husband banish'd;—O, that husband! My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n, As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable Is the desire that's glorious: blest be those, How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills, Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,Comes from my lord with letters.
Change you, madam?The worthy Leonatus is in safetyAnd greets your highness dearly.
Thanks, good sir:You're kindly welcome.
[Aside] All of her that is out of door most rich! If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare, She is alone the Arabian bird, and I Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend! Arm me, audacity, from head to foot! Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight; Rather directly fly.
[Reads] 'He is one of the noblest note, to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust— LEONATUS.' So far I read aloud: But even the very middle of my heart Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully. You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I Have words to bid you, and shall find it so In all that I can do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, fairest lady. What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones Upon the number'd beach? and can we not Partition make with spectacles so precious 'Twixt fair and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys 'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and Contemn with mows the other; nor i' the judgment, For idiots in this case of favour would Be wisely definite; nor i' the appetite; Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed Should make desire vomit emptiness, Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter, trow?
The cloyed will, That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb Longs after for the garbage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, dear sir,Thus raps you? Are you well?
Thanks, madam; well.
Beseech you, sir, desireMy man's abode where I did leave him: heIs strange and peevish.
I was going, sir,To give him welcome.
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger thereSo merry and so gamesome: he is call'dThe Briton reveller.
When he was here,He did incline to sadness, and oft-timesNot knowing why.
I never saw him sad. There is a Frenchman his companion, one An eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves A Gallian girl at home; he furnaces The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton— Your lord, I mean—laughs from's free lungs, cries 'O, Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows By history, report, or his own proof, What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose But must be, will his free hours languish for Assured bondage?'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will my lord say so?
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter: It is a recreation to be by And hear him mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know, Some men are much to blame.
Not he, I hope.
Not he: but yet heaven's bounty towards him might Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much; In you, which I account his beyond all talents, Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound To pity too.
What do you pity, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Two creatures heartily.
Am I one, sir?You look on me: what wreck discern you in meDeserves your pity?
Lamentable! What,To hide me from the radiant sun and solaceI' the dungeon by a snuff?
I pray you, sir,Deliver with more openness your answersTo my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do— I was about to say—enjoy your— But It is an office of the gods to venge it, Not mine to speak on 't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do seem to know Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you,— Since doubting things go ill often hurts more Than to be sure they do; for certainties Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing, The remedy then born—discover to me What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch, Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul To the oath of loyalty; this object, which Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye, Fixing it only here; should I, damn'd then, Slaver with lips as common as the stairs That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands Made hard with hourly falsehood—falsehood, as With labour; then by-peeping in an eye Base and unlustrous as the smoky light That's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit That all the plagues of hell should at one time Encounter such revolt.
My lord, I fear,Has forgot Britain.
And himself. Not I, Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce The beggary of his change; but 'tis your graces That from my mutest conscience to my tongue Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady So fair, and fasten'd to an empery, Would make the great'st king double,— to be partner'd With tomboys hired with that self-exhibition Which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures That play with all infirmities for gold Which rottenness can lend nature! such boil'd stuff As well might poison poison! Be revenged; Or she that bore you was no queen, and you Recoil from your great stock.
Revenged! How should I be revenged? If this be true,— As I have such a heart that both mine ears Must not in haste abuse—if it be true, How should I be revenged?
Should he make me Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets, Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps, In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it. I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure, More noble than that runagate to your bed, And will continue fast to your affection, Still close as sure.
What, ho, Pisanio!
Let me my service tender on your lips.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away! I do condemn mine ears that have So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable, Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not For such an end thou seek'st,—as base as strange. Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far From thy report as thou from honour, and Solicit'st here a lady that disdains Thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio! The king my father shall be made acquainted Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit, A saucy stranger in his court to mart As in a Romish stew and to expound His beastly mind to us, he hath a court He little cares for and a daughter who He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio!
O happy Leonatus! I may say The credit that thy lady hath of thee Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness Her assured credit. Blessed live you long! A lady to the worthiest sir that ever Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon. I have spoke this, to know if your affiance Were deeply rooted; and shall make your lord, That which he is, new o'er: and he is one The truest manner'd; such a holy witch That he enchants societies into him; Half all men's hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god: He hath a kind of honour sets him off, More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry, Most mighty princess, that I have adventured To try your taking a false report; which hath Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment In the election of a sir so rare, Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you, Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
All's well, sir: take my power i' the courtfor yours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My humble thanks. I had almost forgot To entreat your grace but in a small request, And yet of moment to, for it concerns Your lord; myself and other noble friends, Are partners in the business.
Pray, what is't?
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord— The best feather of our wing—have mingled sums To buy a present for the emperor Which I, the factor for the rest, have done In France: 'tis plate of rare device, and jewels Of rich and exquisite form; their values great; And I am something curious, being strange, To have them in safe stowage: may it please you To take them in protection?
Willingly; And pawn mine honour for their safety: since My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them In my bedchamber.
They are in a trunk, Attended by my men: I will make bold To send them to you, only for this night; I must aboard to-morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, no, no.
Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word By lengthening my return. From Gallia I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise To see your grace.
I thank you for your pains:But not away to-morrow!
O, I must, madam: Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please To greet your lord with writing, do't to-night: I have outstood my time; which is material To the tender of our present.
I will write.Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept,And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was there ever man had such luck! when I kissed the jack, upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a hundred pound on't: and then a whoreson jackanapes must take me up for swearing; as if I borrowed mine oaths of him and might not spend them at my pleasure.
What got he by that? You have broke his pate withyour bowl.
[Aside] If his wit had been like him that broke it,it would have run all out.
When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not forany standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?
No my lord;
[SEQ_SPLITTER]nor crop the ears of them.
Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction?Would he had been one of my rank!
[Aside] To have smelt like a fool.
I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a pox on't! I had rather not be so noble as I am; they dare not fight with me, because of the queen my mother: every Jack-slave hath his bellyful of fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock that nobody can match.
[Aside] You are cock and capon too; and you crow,cock, with your comb on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sayest thou?
It is not fit your lordship should undertake everycompanion that you give offence to.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commitoffence to my inferiors.
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.
Why, so I say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night?
A stranger, and I not know on't!
[Aside] He's a strange fellow himself, and knows itnot.
There's an Italian come; and, 'tis thought, one ofLeonatus' friends.
Leonatus! a banished rascal; and he's another,whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One of your lordship's pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there noderogation in't?
You cannot derogate, my lord.
Not easily, I think.
[Aside] You are a fool granted; therefore yourissues, being foolish, do not derogate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, I'll go see this Italian: what I have lostto-day at bowls I'll win to-night of him. Come, go.
I'll attend your lordship.
That such a crafty devil as is his mother Should yield the world this ass! a woman that Bears all down with her brain; and this her son Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart, And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess, Thou divine Imogen, what thou endurest, Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd, A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer More hateful than the foul expulsion is Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act Of the divorce he'ld make! The heavens hold firm The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshaked That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand, To enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land!
Who's there? my woman Helen?
Please you, madam
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What hour is it?
Almost midnight, madam.
I have read three hours then: mine eyes are weak: Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed: Take not away the taper, leave it burning; And if thou canst awake by four o' the clock, I prithee, call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly
To your protection I commend me, gods. From fairies and the tempters of the night Guard me, beseech ye.
The crickets sing, and man's o'er-labour'd sense Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd The chastity he wounded. Cytherea, How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily, And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch! But kiss; one kiss! Rubies unparagon'd, How dearly they do't! 'Tis her breathing that Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o' the taper Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids, To see the enclosed lights, now canopied Under these windows, white and azure laced With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design, To note the chamber: I will write all down: Such and such pictures; there the window; such The adornment of her bed; the arras; figures, Why, such and such; and the contents o' the story. Ah, but some natural notes about her body, Above ten thousand meaner moveables Would testify, to enrich mine inventory. O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her! And be her sense but as a monument, Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off:
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard! 'Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly, As strongly as the conscience does within, To the madding of her lord. On her left breast A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops I' the bottom of a cowslip: here's a voucher, Stronger than ever law could make: this secret Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end? Why should I write this down, that's riveted, Screw'd to my memory? She hath been reading late The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turn'd down Where Philomel gave up. I have enough: To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it. Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear; Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
One, two, three: time, time!
Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, themost coldest that ever turned up ace.
It would make any man cold to lose.
But not every man patient after the noble temper ofyour lordship. You are most hot and furious when you win.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Winning will put any man into courage. If I could get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough. It's almost morning, is't not?
Day, my lord.
I would this music would come: I am advised to giveher music o' mornings; they say it will penetrate.
Come on; tune: if you can penetrate her with your fingering, so; we'll try with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain; but I'll never give o'er. First, a very excellent good-conceited thing; after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to it: and then let her consider.
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings, And Phoebus 'gins arise, His steeds to water at those springs On chaliced flowers that lies; And winking Mary-buds begin To ope their golden eyes: With every thing that pretty is, My lady sweet, arise: Arise, arise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will consider your music the better: if it do not, it is a vice in her ears, which horse-hairs and calves'-guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot, can never amend.
Here comes the king.
I am glad I was up so late; for that's the reason I was up so early: he cannot choose but take this service I have done fatherly.
Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?Will she not forth?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no notice.
The exile of her minion is too new; She hath not yet forgot him: some more time Must wear the print of his remembrance out, And then she's yours.
You are most bound to the king, Who lets go by no vantages that may Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself To orderly soliciting, and be friended With aptness of the season; make denials Increase your services; so seem as if You were inspired to do those duties which You tender to her; that you in all obey her, Save when command to your dismission tends, And therein you are senseless.
Senseless! not so.
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;The one is Caius Lucius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A worthy fellow, Albeit he comes on angry purpose now; But that's no fault of his: we must receive him According to the honour of his sender; And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us, We must extend our notice. Our dear son, When you have given good morning to your mistress, Attend the queen and us; we shall have need To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,Let her lie still and dream.
By your leave, ho! I Know her women are about her: what If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold Which buys admittance; oft it doth; yea, and makes Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up Their deer to the stand o' the stealer; and 'tis gold Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief; Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what Can it not do and undo? I will make One of her women lawyer to me, for I yet not understand the case myself.
By your leave.
Who's there that knocks?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A gentleman.
No more?
Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.
That's moreThan some, whose tailors are as dear as yours,Can justly boast of. What's your lordship's pleasure?
Your lady's person: is she ready?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay,To keep her chamber.
There is gold for you;Sell me your good report.
How! my good name? or to report of youWhat I shall think is good?—The princess!
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains For purchasing but trouble; the thanks I give Is telling you that I am poor of thanks And scarce can spare them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Still, I swear I love you.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me: If you swear still, your recompense is still That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent, I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: 'faith, I shall unfold equal discourtesy To your best kindness: one of your great knowing Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin:I will not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fools are not mad folks.
Do you call me fool?
As I am mad, I do: If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad; That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir, You put me to forget a lady's manners, By being so verbal: and learn now, for all, That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce, By the very truth of it, I care not for you, And am so near the lack of charity— To accuse myself—I hate you; which I had rather You felt than make't my boast.
You sin against Obedience, which you owe your father. For The contract you pretend with that base wretch, One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes, With scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none: And though it be allow'd in meaner parties— Yet who than he more mean?—to knit their souls, On whom there is no more dependency But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot; Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by The consequence o' the crown, and must not soil The precious note of it with a base slave. A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth, A pantler, not so eminent.
Profane fellow Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more But what thou art besides, thou wert too base To be his groom: thou wert dignified enough, Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made Comparative for your virtues, to be styled The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated For being preferred so well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The south-fog rot him!
He never can meet more mischance than come To be but named of thee. His meanest garment, That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer In my respect than all the hairs above thee, Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
'His garment!' Now the devil—
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently—
'His garment!'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sprited with a fool. Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman Search for a jewel that too casually Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me, If I would lose it for a revenue Of any king's in Europe. I do think I saw't this morning: confident I am Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kiss'd it: I hope it be not gone to tell my lord That I kiss aught but he.
'Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
You have abused me:'His meanest garment!'
Ay, I said so, sir:If you will make't an action, call witness to't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will inform your father.
Your mother too: She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope, But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir, To the worst of discontent.
I'll be revenged:'His meanest garment!' Well.
Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sureTo win the king as I am bold her honourWill remain hers.
What means do you make to him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not any, but abide the change of time, Quake in the present winter's state and wish That warmer days would come: in these sear'd hopes, I barely gratify your love; they failing, I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness and your company O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king Hath heard of great Augustus: Caius Lucius Will do's commission throughly: and I think He'll grant the tribute, send the arrearages, Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe, Statist though I am none, nor like to be, That this will prove a war; and you shall hear The legions now in Gallia sooner landed In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen Are men more order'd than when Julius Caesar Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage Worthy his frowning at: their discipline, Now mingled with their courages, will make known To their approvers they are people such That mend upon the world.
See! Iachimo!
The swiftest harts have posted you by land;And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,To make your vessel nimble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Welcome, sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer madeThe speediness of your return.
Your ladyIs one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.
And therewithal the best; or let her beautyLook through a casement to allure false heartsAnd be false with them.
Here are letters for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Their tenor good, I trust.
'Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain courtWhen you were there?
He was expected then,But not approach'd.
All is well yet.Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't notToo dull for your good wearing?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I had lost it, I should have lost the worth of it in gold. I'll make a journey twice as far, to enjoy A second night of such sweet shortness which Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stone's too hard to come by.
Not a whit,Your lady being so easy.
Make not, sir,Your loss your sport: I hope you know that weMust not continue friends.
Good sir, we must, If you keep covenant. Had I not brought The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant We were to question further: but I now Profess myself the winner of her honour, Together with your ring; and not the wronger Of her or you, having proceeded but By both your wills.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you can make't apparent That you have tasted her in bed, my hand And ring is yours; if not, the foul opinion You had of her pure honour gains or loses Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both To who shall find them.
Sir, my circumstances, Being so near the truth as I will make them, Must first induce you to believe: whose strength I will confirm with oath; which, I doubt not, You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her bedchamber,— Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess Had that was well worth watching—it was hang'd With tapesty of silk and silver; the story Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman, And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for The press of boats or pride: a piece of work So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive In workmanship and value; which I wonder'd Could be so rarely and exactly wrought, Since the true life on't was—
This is true;And this you might have heard of here, by me,Or by some other.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]More particularsMust justify my knowledge.
So they must,Or do your honour injury.
The chimney Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures So likely to report themselves: the cutter Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her, Motion and breath left out.
This is a thingWhich you might from relation likewise reap,Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The roof o' the chamber With golden cherubins is fretted: her andirons— I had forgot them—were two winking Cupids Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely Depending on their brands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is her honour! Let it be granted you have seen all this—and praise Be given to your remembrance— the description Of what is in her chamber nothing saves The wager you have laid.
Then, if you can,
Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel; see! And now 'tis up again: it must be married To that your diamond; I'll keep them.
Jove!Once more let me behold it: is it thatWhich I left with her?
Sir—I thank her—that: She stripp'd it from her arm; I see her yet; Her pretty action did outsell her gift, And yet enrich'd it too: she gave it me, and said She prized it once.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May be she pluck'd it offTo send it me.
She writes so to you, doth she?
O, no, no, no! 'tis true. Here, take this too;
It is a basilisk unto mine eye, Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honour Where there is beauty; truth, where semblance; love, Where there's another man: the vows of women Of no more bondage be, to where they are made, Than they are to their virtues; which is nothing. O, above measure false!
Have patience, sir, And take your ring again; 'tis not yet won: It may be probable she lost it; or Who knows if one of her women, being corrupted, Hath stol'n it from her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very true; And so, I hope, he came by't. Back my ring: Render to me some corporal sign about her, More evident than this; for this was stolen.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears. 'Tis true:—nay, keep the ring—'tis true: I am sure She would not lose it: her attendants are All sworn and honourable:—they induced to steal it! And by a stranger!—No, he hath enjoyed her: The cognizance of her incontinency Is this: she hath bought the name of whore thus dearly. There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell Divide themselves between you!
Sir, be patient:This is not strong enough to be believedOf one persuaded well of—
Never talk on't;She hath been colted by him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you seek For further satisfying, under her breast— Worthy the pressing—lies a mole, right proud Of that most delicate lodging: by my life, I kiss'd it; and it gave me present hunger To feed again, though full. You do remember This stain upon her?
Ay, and it doth confirm Another stain, as big as hell can hold, Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns;Once, and a million!
I'll be sworn—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No swearing. If you will swear you have not done't, you lie; And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny Thou'st made me cuckold.
I'll deny nothing.
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal! I will go there and do't, i' the court, before Her father. I'll do something—
Quite besides The government of patience! You have won: Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath He hath against himself.
With all my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there no way for men to be but women Must be half-workers? We are all bastards; And that most venerable man which I Did call my father, was I know not where When I was stamp'd; some coiner with his tools Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seem'd The Dian of that time so doth my wife The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance! Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd And pray'd me oft forbearance; did it with A prudency so rosy the sweet view on't Might well have warm'd old Saturn; that I thought her As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils! This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,—wast not?— Or less,—at first?—perchance he spoke not, but, Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one, Cried 'O!' and mounted; found no opposition But what he look'd for should oppose and she Should from encounter guard. Could I find out The woman's part in me! For there's no motion That tends to vice in man, but I affirm It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it, The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers; Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers; Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain, Nice longing, slanders, mutability, All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows, Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all; For even to vice They are not constant but are changing still One vice, but of a minute old, for one Not half so old as that. I'll write against them, Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater skill In a true hate, to pray they have their will: The very devils cannot plague them better.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,— Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less Than in his feats deserving it—for him And his succession granted Rome a tribute, Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately Is left untender'd.
And, to kill the marvel,Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars, Ere such another Julius. Britain is A world by itself; and we will nothing pay For wearing our own noses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That opportunity Which then they had to take from 's, to resume We have again. Remember, sir, my liege, The kings your ancestors, together with The natural bravery of your isle, which stands As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in With rocks unscalable and roaring waters, With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats, But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest Caesar made here; but made not here his brag Of 'Came' and 'saw' and 'overcame: ' with shame— That first that ever touch'd him—he was carried From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping— Poor ignorant baubles!— upon our terrible seas, Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point— O giglot fortune!—to master Caesar's sword, Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright And Britons strut with courage.
Come, there's no more tribute to be paid: our kingdom is stronger than it was at that time; and, as I said, there is no moe such Caesars: other of them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such straight arms, none.
Son, let your mother end.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a hand. Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
You must know, Till the injurious Romans did extort This tribute from us, we were free: Caesar's ambition, Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch The sides o' the world, against all colour here Did put the yoke upon 's; which to shake off Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon Ourselves to be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We do.
Say, then, to Caesar, Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which Ordain'd our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar Hath too much mangled; whose repair and franchise Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed, Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws, Who was the first of Britain which did put His brows within a golden crown and call'd Himself a king.
I am sorry, Cymbeline, That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar— Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than Thyself domestic officers—thine enemy: Receive it from me, then: war and confusion In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: look For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied, I thank thee for myself.
Thou art welcome, Caius. Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent Much under him; of him I gather'd honour; Which he to seek of me again, perforce, Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for Their liberties are now in arms; a precedent Which not to read would show the Britons cold: So Caesar shall not find them.
Let proof speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His majesty bids you welcome. Make pastime with us a day or two, or longer: if you seek us afterwards in other terms, you shall find us in our salt-water girdle: if you beat us out of it, it is yours; if you fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare the better for you; and there's an end.
So, sir.
I know your master's pleasure and he mine:All the remain is 'Welcome!'
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not What monster's her accuser? Leonatus, O master! what a strange infection Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian, As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No: She's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes, More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults As would take in some virtue. O my master! Thy mind to her is now as low as were Thy fortunes. How! that I should murder her? Upon the love and truth and vows which I Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood? If it be so to do good service, never Let me be counted serviceable. How look I, That I should seem to lack humanity so much as this fact comes to?
'Do't: the letter that I have sent her, by her own command Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper! Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble, Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes. I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Pisanio!
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatus! O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer That knew the stars as I his characters; He'ld lay the future open. You good gods, Let what is here contain'd relish of love, Of my lord's health, of his content, yet not That we two are asunder; let that grieve him: Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them, For it doth physic love: of his content, All but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike: Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, gods!
'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria, at Milford-Haven: what your own love will out of this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your, increasing in love, LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.' O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio? He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs May plod it in a week, why may not I Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,— Who long'st, like me, to see thy lord; who long'st,— let me bate,-but not like me—yet long'st, But in a fainter kind:—O, not like me; For mine's beyond beyond— say, and speak thick; Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing, To the smothering of the sense—how far it is To this same blessed Milford: and by the way Tell me how Wales was made so happy as To inherit such a haven: but first of all, How we may steal from hence, and for the gap That we shall make in time, from our hence-going And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence: Why should excuse be born or e'er begot? We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee, speak, How many score of miles may we well ride 'Twixt hour and hour?
One score 'twixt sun and sun,Madam, 's enough for you:
[SEQ_SPLITTER]and too much too.
Why, one that rode to's execution, man, Could never go so slow: I have heard of riding wagers, Where horses have been nimbler than the sands That run i' the clock's behalf. But this is foolery: Go bid my woman feign a sickness; say She'll home to her father: and provide me presently A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit A franklin's housewife.
Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me, man: nor here, nor here, Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them, That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee; Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say, Accessible is none but Milford way.
A goodly day not to keep house, with such Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you To a morning's holy office: the gates of monarchs Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through And keep their impious turbans on, without Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven! We house i' the rock, yet use thee not so hardly As prouder livers do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail, heaven!
Hail, heaven!
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill; Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats. Consider, When you above perceive me like a crow, That it is place which lessens and sets off; And you may then revolve what tales I have told you Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war: This service is not service, so being done, But being so allow'd: to apprehend thus, Draws us a profit from all things we see; And often, to our comfort, shall we find The sharded beetle in a safer hold Than is the full-wing'd eagle. O, this life Is nobler than attending for a cheque, Richer than doing nothing for a bauble, Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk: Such gain the cap of him that makes 'em fine, Yet keeps his book uncross'd: no life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged, Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not What air's from home. Haply this life is best, If quiet life be best; sweeter to you That have a sharper known; well corresponding With your stiff age: but unto us it is A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed; A prison for a debtor, that not dares To stride a limit.
What should we speak of When we are old as you? when we shall hear The rain and wind beat dark December, how, In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing; We are beastly, subtle as the fox for prey, Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat; Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage We make a quire, as doth the prison'd bird, And sing our bondage freely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How you speak! Did you but know the city's usuries And felt them knowingly; the art o' the court As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb Is certain falling, or so slippery that The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war, A pain that only seems to seek out danger I' the name of fame and honour; which dies i' the search, And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph As record of fair act; nay, many times, Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse, Must court'sy at the censure:— O boys, this story The world may read in me: my body's mark'd With Roman swords, and my report was once First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me, And when a soldier was the theme, my name Was not far off: then was I as a tree Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night, A storm or robbery, call it what you will, Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves, And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour!
My fault being nothing—as I have told you oft— But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline I was confederate with the Romans: so Follow'd my banishment, and this twenty years This rock and these demesnes have been my world; Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid More pious debts to heaven than in all The fore-end of my time. But up to the mountains! This is not hunters' language: he that strikes The venison first shall be the lord o' the feast; To him the other two shall minister; And we will fear no poison, which attends In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature! These boys know little they are sons to the king; Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive. They think they are mine; and though train'd up thus meanly I' the cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them In simple and low things to prince it much Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore, The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who The king his father call'd Guiderius,— Jove! When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out Into my story: say 'Thus, mine enemy fell, And thus I set my foot on 's neck;' even then The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats, Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal, Once Arviragus, in as like a figure, Strikes life into my speech and shows much more His own conceiving.— Hark, the game is roused! O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon, At three and two years old, I stole these babes; Thinking to bar thee of succession, as Thou reft'st me of my lands. Euriphile, Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother, And every day do honour to her grave: Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd, They take for natural father. The game is up.
Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place Was near at hand: ne'er long'd my mother so To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man! Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind, That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus, Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd Beyond self-explication: put thyself Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter? Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with A look untender? If't be summer news, Smile to't before; if winterly, thou need'st But keep that countenance still. My husband's hand! That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him, And he's at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue May take off some extremity, which to read Would be even mortal to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Please you, read;And you shall find me, wretched man, a thingThe most disdain'd of fortune.
[Reads] 'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises, but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain as I expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio, must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away her life: I shall give thee opportunity at Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour and equally to me disloyal.'
What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper Hath cut her throat already. No, 'tis slander, Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath Rides on the posting winds and doth belie All corners of the world: kings, queens and states, Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?
False to his bed! What is it to be false? To lie in watch there and to think on him? To weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep charge nature, To break it with a fearful dream of him And cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?
Alas, good lady!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I false! Thy conscience witness: Iachimo, Thou didst accuse him of incontinency; Thou then look'dst like a villain; now methinks Thy favour's good enough. Some jay of Italy Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him: Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion; And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls, I must be ripp'd:—to pieces with me!— O, Men's vows are women's traitors! All good seeming, By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought Put on for villany; not born where't grows, But worn a bait for ladies.
Good madam, hear me.
True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas, Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity From most true wretchedness: so thou, Posthumus, Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men; Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured From thy great fall. Come, fellow, be thou honest: Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him, A little witness my obedience: look! I draw the sword myself: take it, and hit The innocent mansion of my love, my heart; Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief; Thy master is not there, who was indeed The riches of it: do his bidding; strike Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause; But now thou seem'st a coward.
Hence, vile instrument!Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must die; And if I do not by thy hand, thou art No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter There is a prohibition so divine That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart. Something's afore't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence; Obedient as the scabbard. What is here? The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus, All turn'd to heresy? Away, away, Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools Believe false teachers: though those that are betray'd Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor Stands in worse case of woe. And thou, Posthumus, thou that didst set up My disobedience 'gainst the king my father And make me put into contempt the suits Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find It is no act of common passage, but A strain of rareness: and I grieve myself To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her That now thou tirest on, how thy memory Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee, dispatch: The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife? Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding, When I desire it too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O gracious lady,Since I received command to do this businessI have not slept one wink.
Do't, and to bed then.
I'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.
Wherefore then Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused So many miles with a pretence? this place? Mine action and thine own? our horses' labour? The time inviting thee? the perturb'd court, For my being absent? whereunto I never Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far, To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand, The elected deer before thee?
But to win time To lose so bad employment; in the which I have consider'd of a course. Good lady, Hear me with patience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Talk thy tongue weary; speak I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear Therein false struck, can take no greater wound, Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.
Then, madam,I thought you would not back again.
Most like;Bringing me here to kill me.
Not so, neither: But if I were as wise as honest, then My purpose would prove well. It cannot be But that my master is abused: Some villain, ay, and singular in his art. Hath done you both this cursed injury.
Some Roman courtezan.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, on my life. I'll give but notice you are dead and send him Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court, And that will well confirm it.
Why good fellow, What shall I do the while? where bide? how live? Or in my life what comfort, when I am Dead to my husband?
If you'll back to the court—
No court, no father; nor no more ado With that harsh, noble, simple nothing, That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me As fearful as a siege.
If not at court,Then not in Britain must you bide.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where then Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night, Are they not but in Britain? I' the world's volume Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't; In a great pool a swan's nest: prithee, think There's livers out of Britain.
I am most glad You think of other place. The ambassador, Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven To-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise That which, to appear itself, must not yet be But by self-danger, you should tread a course Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near The residence of Posthumus; so nigh at least That though his actions were not visible, yet Report should render him hourly to your ear As truly as he moves.
O, for such means!Though peril to my modesty, not death on't,I would adventure.
Well, then, here's the point: You must forget to be a woman; change Command into obedience: fear and niceness— The handmaids of all women, or, more truly, Woman its pretty self—into a waggish courage: Ready in gibes, quick-answer'd, saucy and As quarrelous as the weasel; nay, you must Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek, Exposing it—but, O, the harder heart! Alack, no remedy!—to the greedy touch Of common-kissing Titan, and forget Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein You made great Juno angry.
Nay, be briefI see into thy end, and am almostA man already.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]First, make yourself but like one. Fore-thinking this, I have already fit— 'Tis in my cloak-bag—doublet, hat, hose, all That answer to them: would you in their serving, And with what imitation you can borrow From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius Present yourself, desire his service, tell him wherein you're happy,—which you'll make him know, If that his head have ear in music,—doubtless With joy he will embrace you, for he's honourable And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad, You have me, rich; and I will never fail Beginning nor supplyment.
Thou art all the comfort The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away: There's more to be consider'd; but we'll even All that good time will give us: this attempt I am soldier to, and will abide it with A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell, Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected of Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress, Here is a box; I had it from the queen: What's in't is precious; if you are sick at sea, Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this Will drive away distemper. To some shade, And fit you to your manhood. May the gods Direct you to the best!
Amen: I thank thee.
Thus far; and so farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, royal sir. My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence; And am right sorry that I must report ye My master's enemy.
Our subjects, sir, Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself To show less sovereignty than they, must needs Appear unkinglike.
So, sir: I desire of youA conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.Madam, all joy befal your grace!
And you!
My lords, you are appointed for that office;The due of honour in no point omit.So farewell, noble Lucius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your hand, my lord.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forthI wear it as your enemy.
Sir, the eventIs yet to name the winner: fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!
He goes hence frowning: but it honours usThat we have given him cause.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis all the better;Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness: The powers that he already hath in Gallia Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves His war for Britain.
'Tis not sleepy business;But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen, Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd The duty of the day: she looks us like A thing more made of malice than of duty: We have noted it. Call her before us; for We have been too slight in sufferance.
Royal sir, Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord, 'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty, Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady So tender of rebukes that words are strokes And strokes death to her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is she, sir? HowCan her contempt be answer'd?
Please you, sir,Her chambers are all lock'd; and there's no answerThat will be given to the loudest noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her, She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close, Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity, She should that duty leave unpaid to you, Which daily she was bound to proffer: this She wish'd me to make known; but our great court Made me to blame in memory.
Her doors lock'd?Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fearProve false!
Son, I say, follow the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,have not seen these two days.
Go, look after.
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus! He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes It is a thing most precious. But for her, Where is she gone? Haply, despair hath seized her, Or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown To her desired Posthumus: gone she is To death or to dishonour; and my end Can make good use of either: she being down, I have the placing of the British crown.
How now, my son!
'Tis certain she is fled.Go in and cheer the king: he rages; noneDare come about him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] All the better: mayThis night forestall him of the coming day!
I love and hate her: for she's fair and royal, And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one The best she hath, and she, of all compounded, Outsells them all; I love her therefore: but Disdaining me and throwing favours on The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment That what's else rare is choked; and in that point I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed, To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall—
Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah? Come hither: ah, you precious pander! Villain, Where is thy lady? In a word; or else Thou art straightway with the fiends.
O, good my lord!
Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter,— I will not ask again. Close villain, I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus? From whose so many weights of baseness cannot A dram of worth be drawn.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, my lord,How can she be with him? When was she missed?He is in Rome.
Where is she, sir? Come nearer;No further halting: satisfy me homeWhat is become of her.
O, my all-worthy lord!
All-worthy villain! Discover where thy mistress is at once, At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!' Speak, or thy silence on the instant is Thy condemnation and thy death.
Then, sir,This paper is the history of my knowledgeTouching her flight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let's see't. I will pursue herEven to Augustus' throne.
[Aside] Or this, or perish.She's far enough; and what he learns by thisMay prove his travel, not her danger.
Hum!
[Aside] I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Sirrah, is this letter true?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus' hand; I know't. Sirrah, if thou wouldst not be a villain, but do me true service, undergo those employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is, what villany soe'er I bid thee do, to perform it directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice for thy preferment.
Well, my good lord.
Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of mine: wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me thy hand; here's my purse. Hast any of thylate master's garments in thy possession?
I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit hewore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that suithither: let it be thy lint service; go.
I shall, my lord.
Meet thee at Milford-Haven!—I forgot to ask him one thing; I'll remember't anon:—even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would these garments were come. She said upon a time—the bitterness of it I now belch from my heart—that she held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect than my noble and natural person together with the adornment of my qualities. With that suit upon my back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her eyes; there shall she see my valour, which will then be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my speech of insultment ended on his dead body, and when my lust hath dined,—which, as I say, to vex her I will execute in the clothes that she so praised,—to the court I'll knock her back, foot her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingly, and I'll be merry in my revenge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be those the garments?
Ay, my noble lord.
How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second thing that I have commanded thee: the third is, that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design. Be but duteous, and true preferment shall tender itself to thee. My revenge is now at Milford: would I had wings to follow it! Come, and be true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee Were to prove false, which I will never be, To him that is most true. To Milford go, And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow, You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed Be cross'd with slowness; labour be his meed!
I see a man's life is a tedious one: I have tired myself, and for two nights together Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick, But that my resolution helps me. Milford, When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee, Thou wast within a ken: O Jove! I think Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean, Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie, That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder, When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord! Thou art one o' the false ones. Now I think on thee, My hunger's gone; but even before, I was At point to sink for food. But what is this? Here is a path to't: 'tis some savage hold: I were best not to call; I dare not call: yet famine, Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant, Plenty and peace breeds cowards: hardness ever Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who's here? If any thing that's civil, speak; if savage, Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I'll enter. Best draw my sword: and if mine enemy But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't. Such a foe, good heavens!
You, Polydore, have proved best woodman and Are master of the feast: Cadwal and I Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match: The sweat of industry would dry and die, But for the end it works to. Come; our stomachs Will make what's homely savoury: weariness Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here, Poor house, that keep'st thyself!
I am thoroughly weary.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is cold meat i' the cave; we'll browse on that,Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd.
[Looking into the cave] Stay; come not in.But that it eats our victuals, I should thinkHere were a fairy.
What's the matter, sir?
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,An earthly paragon! Behold divinenessNo elder than a boy!
Good masters, harm me not: Before I enter'd here, I call'd; and thought To have begg'd or bought what I have took: good troth, I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here's money for my meat: I would have left it on the board so soon As I had made my meal, and parted With prayers for the provider.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of thoseWho worship dirty gods.
I see you're angry:Know, if you kill me for my fault, I shouldHave died had I not made it.
Whither bound?
To Milford-Haven.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's your name?
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who Is bound for Italy; he embark'd at Milford; To whom being going, almost spent with hunger, I am fall'n in this offence.
Prithee, fair youth, Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds By this rude place we live in. Well encounter'd! 'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it. Boys, bid him welcome.
Were you a woman, youth,I should woo hard but be your groom. In honesty,I bid for you as I'd buy.
I'll make't my comfort He is a man; I'll love him as my brother: And such a welcome as I'd give to him After long absence, such is yours: most welcome! Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Mongst friends,If brothers.
Would it had been so, that they Had been my father's sons! then had my prize Been less, and so more equal ballasting To thee, Posthumus.
He wrings at some distress.
Would I could free't!
Or I, whate'er it be,What pain it cost, what danger. God's!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark, boys.
Great men, That had a court no bigger than this cave, That did attend themselves and had the virtue Which their own conscience seal'd them—laying by That nothing-gift of differing multitudes— Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods! I'd change my sex to be companion with them, Since Leonatus's false.
It shall be so. Boys, we'll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in: Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supp'd, We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story, So far as thou wilt speak it.
Pray, draw near.
The night to the owl and morn to the larkless welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, sir.
I pray, draw near.
This is the tenor of the emperor's writ: That since the common men are now in action 'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians, And that the legions now in Gallia are Full weak to undertake our wars against The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite The gentry to this business. He creates Lucius preconsul: and to you the tribunes, For this immediate levy, he commends His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!
Is Lucius general of the forces?
Ay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Remaining now in Gallia?
With those legions Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy Must be supplyant: the words of your commission Will tie you to the numbers and the time Of their dispatch.
We will discharge our duty.
I am near to the place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his garments serve me! Why should his mistress, who was made by him that made the tailor, not be fit too? the rather—saving reverence of the word—for 'tis said a woman's fitness comes by fits. Therein I must play the workman. I dare speak it to myself—for it is not vain-glory for a man and his glass to confer in his own chamber— I mean, the lines of my body are as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time, above him in birth, alike conversant in general services, and more remarkable in single oppositions: yet this imperceiverant thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is! Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon thy shoulders, shall within this hour be off; thy mistress enforced; thy garments cut to pieces before thy face: and all this done, spurn her home to her father; who may haply be a little angry for my so rough usage; but my mother, having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my commendations. My horse is tied up safe: out, sword, and to a sore purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand! This is the very description of their meeting-place; and the fellow dares not deceive me.
[To IMOGEN] You are not well: remain here in the cave;We'll come to you after hunting.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To IMOGEN] Brother, stay here.Are we not brothers?
So man and man should be;But clay and clay differs in dignity,Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting; I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well; But not so citizen a wanton as To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me; Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me Cannot amend me; society is no comfort To one not sociable: I am not very sick, Since I can reason of it. Pray you, trust me here: I'll rob none but myself; and let me die, Stealing so poorly.
I love thee; I have spoke itHow much the quantity, the weight as much,As I do love my father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What! how! how!
If it be sin to say so, I yoke me In my good brother's fault: I know not why I love this youth; and I have heard you say, Love's reason's without reason: the bier at door, And a demand who is't shall die, I'd say 'My father, not this youth.'
[Aside] O noble strain! O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness! Cowards father cowards and base things sire base: Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace. I'm not their father; yet who this should be, Doth miracle itself, loved before me. 'Tis the ninth hour o' the morn.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You health. So please you, sir.
[Aside] These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies I have heard! Our courtiers say all's savage but at court: Experience, O, thou disprovest report! The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish. I am sick still; heart-sick. Pisanio, I'll now taste of thy drug.
I could not stir him:He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me: yet said, hereafterI might know more.
To the field, to the field!We'll leave you for this time: go in and rest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll not be long away.
Pray, be not sick,For you must be our housewife.
Well or ill,I am bound to you.
And shalt be ever.
This youth, how'er distress'd, appears he hath hadGood ancestors.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How angel-like he sings!
But his neat cookery! he cut our roots In characters, And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick And he her dieter.
Nobly he yokes A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh Was that it was, for not being such a smile; The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly From so divine a temple, to commix With winds that sailors rail at.
I do noteThat grief and patience, rooted in him both,Mingle their spurs together.
Grow, patience!And let the stinking elder, grief, untwineHis perishing root with the increasing vine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is great morning. Come, away!—Who's there?
I cannot find those runagates; that villainHath mock'd me. I am faint.
'Those runagates!' Means he not us? I partly know him: 'tis Cloten, the son o' the queen. I fear some ambush. I saw him not these many years, and yet I know 'tis he. We are held as outlaws: hence!
He is but one: you and my brother searchWhat companies are near: pray you, away;Let me alone with him.
Soft! What are youThat fly me thus? some villain mountaineers?I have heard of such. What slave art thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A thingMore slavish did I ne'er than answeringA slave without a knock.
Thou art a robber,A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I An arm as big as thine? a heart as big? Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art, Why I should yield to thee?
Thou villain base,Know'st me not by my clothes?
No, nor thy tailor, rascal,Who is thy grandfather: he made those clothes,Which, as it seems, make thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou precious varlet,My tailor made them not.
Hence, then, and thankThe man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool;I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious thief,Hear but my name, and tremble.
What's thy name?
Cloten, thou villain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name, I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad, or Adder, Spider, 'Twould move me sooner.
To thy further fear,Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt knowI am son to the queen.
I am sorry for 't; not seemingSo worthy as thy birth.
Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise:At fools I laugh, not fear them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Die the death: When I have slain thee with my proper hand, I'll follow those that even now fled hence, And on the gates of Lud's-town set your heads: Yield, rustic mountaineer.
No companies abroad?
None in the world: you did mistake him, sure.
I cannot tell: long is it since I saw him, But time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice, And burst of speaking, were as his: I am absolute 'Twas very Cloten.
In this place we left them:I wish my brother make good time with him,You say he is so fell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Being scarce made up, I mean, to man, he had not apprehension Of roaring terrors; for the effect of judgment Is oft the cause of fear. But, see, thy brother.
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse; There was no money in't: not Hercules Could have knock'd out his brains, for he had none: Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne My head as I do his.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head, Son to the queen, after his own report; Who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore With his own single hand he'ld take us in Displace our heads where—thank the gods!—they grow, And set them on Lud's-town.
We are all undone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, worthy father, what have we to lose, But that he swore to take, our lives? The law Protects not us: then why should we be tender To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us, Play judge and executioner all himself, For we do fear the law? What company Discover you abroad?
No single soul Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason He must have some attendants. Though his humour Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that From one bad thing to worse; not frenzy, not Absolute madness could so far have raved To bring him here alone; although perhaps It may be heard at court that such as we Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time May make some stronger head; the which he hearing— As it is like him—might break out, and swear He'ld fetch us in; yet is't not probable To come alone, either he so undertaking, Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear, If we do fear this body hath a tail More perilous than the head.
Let ordinanceCome as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er,My brother hath done well.
I had no mindTo hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sicknessDid make my way long forth.
With his own sword, Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en His head from him: I'll throw't into the creek Behind our rock; and let it to the sea, And tell the fishes he's the queen's son, Cloten: That's all I reck.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I fear 'twill be revenged:Would, Polydote, thou hadst not done't! though valourBecomes thee well enough.
Would I had done't So the revenge alone pursued me! Polydore, I love thee brotherly, but envy much Thou hast robb'd me of this deed: I would revenges, That possible strength might meet, would seek us through And put us to our answer.
Well, 'tis done: We'll hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our rock; You and Fidele play the cooks: I'll stay Till hasty Polydore return, and bring him To dinner presently.
Poor sick Fidele! I'll weringly to him: to gain his colour I'ld let a parish of such Clotens' blood, And praise myself for charity.
O thou goddess, Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon'st In these two princely boys! They are as gentle As zephyrs blowing below the violet, Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough, Their royal blood enchafed, as the rudest wind, That by the top doth take the mountain pine, And make him stoop to the vale. 'Tis wonder That an invisible instinct should frame them To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught, Civility not seen from other, valour That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop As if it had been sow'd. Yet still it's strange What Cloten's being here to us portends, Or what his death will bring us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where's my brother? I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream, In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage For his return.
My ingenious instrument!Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasionHath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean? since death of my dear'st mother it did not speak before. All solemn things Should answer solemn accidents. The matter? Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys Is jollity for apes and grief for boys. Is Cadwal mad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look, here he comes,And brings the dire occasion in his armsOf what we blame him for.
The bird is dead That we have made so much on. I had rather Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty, To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch, Than have seen this.
O sweetest, fairest lily!My brother wears thee not the one half so wellAs when thou grew'st thyself.
O melancholy! Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare Might easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing! Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I, Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy. How found you him?
Stark, as you see: Thus smiling, as some fly hid tickled slumber, Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at; his right cheek Reposing on a cushion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where?
O' the floor; His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept, and put My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness Answer'd my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps: If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed; With female fairies will his tomb be haunted, And worms will not come to thee.
With fairest flowers Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele, I'll sweeten thy sad grave: thou shalt not lack The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose, nor The azured harebell, like thy veins, no, nor The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander, Out-sweeten'd not thy breath: the ruddock would, With charitable bill,—O bill, sore-shaming Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie Without a monument!—bring thee all this; Yea, and furr'd moss besides, when flowers are none, To winter-ground thy corse.
Prithee, have done; And do not play in wench-like words with that Which is so serious. Let us bury him, And not protract with admiration what Is now due debt. To the grave!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, where shall's lay him?
By good Euriphile, our mother.
Be't so: And let us, Polydore, though now our voices Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground, As once our mother; use like note and words, Save that Euriphile must be Fidele.
Cadwal, I cannot sing: I'll weep, and word it with thee; For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse Than priests and fanes that lie.
We'll speak it, then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Great griefs, I see, medicine the less; for Cloten Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys; And though he came our enemy, remember He was paid for that: though mean and mighty, rotting Together, have one dust, yet reverence, That angel of the world, doth make distinction Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely And though you took his life, as being our foe, Yet bury him as a prince.
Pray You, fetch him hither. Thersites' body is as good as Ajax', When neither are alive.
If you'll go fetch him,We'll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to the east;My father hath a reason for't.
'Tis true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come on then, and remove him.
So. Begin.
Fear no more the heat o' the sun, Nor the furious winter's rages; Thou thy worldly task hast done, Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages: Golden lads and girls all must, As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o' the great; Thou art past the tyrant's stroke; Care no more to clothe and eat; To thee the reed is as the oak: The sceptre, learning, physic, must All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning flash,
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers mustConsign to thee, and come to dust.
No exorciser harm thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
Quiet consummation have;And renowned be thy grave!
We have done our obsequies: come, lay him down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here's a few flowers; but 'bout midnight, more: The herbs that have on them cold dew o' the night Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces. You were as flowers, now wither'd: even so These herblets shall, which we upon you strew. Come on, away: apart upon our knees. The ground that gave them first has them again: Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.
[Awaking] Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven; which is the way?— I thank you.—By yond bush?—Pray, how far thither? 'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?— I have gone all night. 'Faith, I'll lie down and sleep. But, soft! no bedfellow!—O god s and goddesses!
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world; This bloody man, the care on't. I hope I dream; For so I thought I was a cave-keeper, And cook to honest creatures: but 'tis not so; 'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing, Which the brain makes of fumes: our very eyes Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith, I tremble stiff with fear: but if there be Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity As a wren's eye, fear'd gods, a part of it! The dream's here still: even when I wake, it is Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt. A headless man! The garments of Posthumus! I know the shape of's leg: this is his hand; His foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh; The brawns of Hercules: but his Jovial face Murder in heaven?—How!—'Tis gone. Pisanio, All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks, And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou, Conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten, Hast here cut off my lord. To write and read Be henceforth treacherous! Damn'd Pisanio Hath with his forged letters,—damn'd Pisanio— From this most bravest vessel of the world Struck the main-top! O Posthumus! alas, Where is thy head? where's that? Ay me! where's that? Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart, And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio? 'Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant! The drug he gave me, which he said was precious And cordial to me, have I not found it Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home: This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten's: O! Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood, That we the horrider may seem to those Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord!
To them the legions garrison'd in Gailia, After your will, have cross'd the sea, attending You here at Milford-Haven with your ships: They are in readiness.
But what from Rome?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The senate hath stirr'd up the confiners And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits, That promise noble service: and they come Under the conduct of bold Iachimo, Syenna's brother.
When expect you them?
With the next benefit o' the wind.
This forwardness Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers Be muster'd; bid the captains look to't. Now, sir, What have you dream'd of late of this war's purpose?
Last night the very gods show'd me a vision— I fast and pray'd for their intelligence—thus: I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd From the spongy south to this part of the west, There vanish'd in the sunbeams: which portends— Unless my sins abuse my divination— Success to the Roman host.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dream often so, And never false. Soft, ho! what trunk is here Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime It was a worthy building. How! a page! Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather; For nature doth abhor to make his bed With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead. Let's see the boy's face.
He's alive, my lord.
He'll then instruct us of this body. Young one, Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems They crave to be demanded. Who is this Thou makest thy bloody pillow? Or who was he That, otherwise than noble nature did, Hath alter'd that good picture? What's thy interest In this sad wreck? How came it? Who is it? What art thou?
I am nothing: or if not, Nothing to be were better. This was my master, A very valiant Briton and a good, That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas! There is no more such masters: I may wander From east to occident, cry out for service, Try many, all good, serve truly, never Find such another master.
'Lack, good youth!Thou movest no less with thy complaining thanThy master in bleeding: say his name, good friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Richard du Champ.
If I do lie and doNo harm by it, though the gods hear, I hopeThey'll pardon it.—Say you, sir?
Thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same: Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name. Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure, No less beloved. The Roman emperor's letters, Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner Than thine own worth prefer thee: go with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll follow, sir. But first, an't please the gods, I'll hide my master from the flies, as deep As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha' strew'd his grave, And on it said a century of prayers, Such as I can, twice o'er, I'll weep and sigh; And leaving so his service, follow you, So please you entertain me.
Ay, good youth! And rather father thee than master thee. My friends, The boy hath taught us manly duties: let us Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can, And make him with our pikes and partisans A grave: come, arm him. Boy, he is preferr'd By thee to us, and he shall be interr'd As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes Some falls are means the happier to arise.
Again; and bring me word how 'tis with her.
A fever with the absence of her son, A madness, of which her life's in danger. Heavens, How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen, The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen Upon a desperate bed, and in a time When fearful wars point at me; her son gone, So needful for this present: it strikes me, past The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow, Who needs must know of her departure and Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee By a sharp torture.
Sir, my life is yours; I humbly set it at your will; but, for my mistress, I nothing know where she remains, why gone, Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your highness, Hold me your loyal servant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my liege, The day that she was missing he was here: I dare be bound he's true and shall perform All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten, There wants no diligence in seeking him, And will, no doubt, be found.
The time is troublesome.
We'll slip you for a season; but our jealousyDoes yet depend.
So please your majesty, The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn, Are landed on your coast, with a supply Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!I am amazed with matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my liege, Your preparation can affront no less Than what you hear of: come more, for more you're ready: The want is but to put those powers in motion That long to move.
I thank you. Let's withdraw; And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not What can from Italy annoy us; but We grieve at chances here. Away!
I heard no letter from my master since I wrote him Imogen was slain: 'tis strange: Nor hear I from my mistress who did promise To yield me often tidings: neither know I What is betid to Cloten; but remain Perplex'd in all. The heavens still must work. Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true. These present wars shall find I love my country, Even to the note o' the king, or I'll fall in them. All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd: Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd.
The noise is round about us.
Let us from it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock itFrom action and adventure?
Nay, what hope Have we in hiding us? This way, the Romans Must or for Britons slay us, or receive us For barbarous and unnatural revolts During their use, and slay us after.
Sons, We'll higher to the mountains; there secure us. To the king's party there's no going: newness Of Cloten's death—we being not known, not muster'd Among the bands—may drive us to a render Where we have lived, and so extort from's that Which we have done, whose answer would be death Drawn on with torture.
This is, sir, a doubtIn such a time nothing becoming you,Nor satisfying us.
It is not likely That when they hear the Roman horses neigh, Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes And ears so cloy'd importantly as now, That they will waste their time upon our note, To know from whence we are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, I am known Of many in the army: many years, Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him From my remembrance. And, besides, the king Hath not deserved my service nor your loves; Who find in my exile the want of breeding, The certainty of this hard life; aye hopeless To have the courtesy your cradle promised, But to be still hot summer's tamings and The shrinking slaves of winter.
Than be so Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to the army: I and my brother are not known; yourself So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown, Cannot be question'd.
By this sun that shines, I'll thither: what thing is it that I never Did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood, But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison! Never bestrid a horse, save one that had A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed To look upon the holy sun, to have The benefit of his blest beams, remaining So long a poor unknown.
By heavens, I'll go: If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave, I'll take the better care, but if you will not, The hazard therefore due fall on me by The hands of Romans!
So say I amen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No reason I, since of your lives you set So slight a valuation, should reserve My crack'd one to more care. Have with you, boys! If in your country wars you chance to die, That is my bed too, lads, an there I'll lie: Lead, lead.
The time seems long; their bloodthinks scorn,Till it fly out and show them princes born.
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wish'd Thou shouldst be colour'd thus. You married ones, If each of you should take this course, how many Must murder wives much better than themselves For wrying but a little! O Pisanio! Every good servant does not all commands: No bond but to do just ones. Gods! if you Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never Had lived to put on this: so had you saved The noble Imogen to repent, and struck Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack, You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love, To have them fall no more: you some permit To second ills with ills, each elder worse, And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift. But Imogen is your own: do your best wills, And make me blest to obey! I am brought hither Among the Italian gentry, and to fight Against my lady's kingdom: 'tis enough That, Britain, I have kill'd thy mistress; peace! I'll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens, Hear patiently my purpose: I'll disrobe me Of these Italian weeds and suit myself As does a Briton peasant: so I'll fight Against the part I come with; so I'll die For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life Is every breath a death; and thus, unknown, Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril Myself I'll dedicate. Let me make men know More valour in me than my habits show. Gods, put the strength o' the Leonati in me! To shame the guise o' the world, I will begin The fashion, less without and more within.
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom Takes off my manhood: I have belied a lady, The princess of this country, and the air on't Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl, A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me In my profession? Knighthoods and honours, borne As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn. If that thy gentry, Britain, go before This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.
Stand, stand! We have the advantage of the ground; The lane is guarded: nothing routs us but The villany of our fears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand, stand, and fight!
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;For friends kill friends, and the disorder's suchAs war were hoodwink'd.
'Tis their fresh supplies.
It is a day turn'd strangely: or betimesLet's reinforce, or fly.
Camest thou from where they made the stand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did.Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
I did.
No blame be to you, sir; for all was lost, But that the heavens fought: the king himself Of his wings destitute, the army broken, And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying Through a straight lane; the enemy full-hearted, Lolling the tongue with slaughtering, having work More plentiful than tools to do't, struck down Some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling Merely through fear; that the straight pass was damm'd With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living To die with lengthen'd shame.
Where was this lane?
Close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf; Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier, An honest one, I warrant; who deserved So long a breeding as his white beard came to, In doing this for's country: athwart the lane, He, with two striplings-lads more like to run The country base than to commit such slaughter With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer Than those for preservation cased, or shame— Made good the passage; cried to those that fled, 'Our Britain s harts die flying, not our men: To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand; Or we are Romans and will give you that Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save, But to look back in frown: stand, stand.' These three, Three thousand confident, in act as many— For three performers are the file when all The rest do nothing—with this word 'Stand, stand,' Accommodated by the place, more charming With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks, Part shame, part spirit renew'd; that some, turn'd coward But by example—O, a sin in war, Damn'd in the first beginners!—gan to look The way that they did, and to grin like lions Upon the pikes o' the hunters. Then began A stop i' the chaser, a retire, anon A rout, confusion thick; forthwith they fly Chickens, the way which they stoop'd eagles; slaves, The strides they victors made: and now our cowards, Like fragments in hard voyages, became The life o' the need: having found the backdoor open Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound! Some slain before; some dying; some their friends O'er borne i' the former wave: ten, chased by one, Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty: Those that would die or ere resist are grown The mortal bugs o' the field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was strange chanceA narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.
Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made Rather to wonder at the things you hear Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon't, And vent it for a mockery? Here is one: 'Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane, Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane.'
Nay, be not angry, sir.
'Lack, to what end? Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend; For if he'll do as he is made to do, I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too. You have put me into rhyme.
Farewell; you're angry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Still going?
This is a lord! O noble misery, To be i' the field, and ask 'what news?' of me! To-day how many would have given their honours To have saved their carcasses! took heel to do't, And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charm'd, Could not find death where I did hear him groan, Nor feel him where he struck: being an ugly monster, 'Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds, Sweet words; or hath more ministers than we That draw his knives i' the war. Well, I will find him For being now a favourer to the Briton, No more a Briton, I have resumed again The part I came in: fight I will no more, But yield me to the veriest hind that shall Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is Here made by the Roman; great the answer be Britons must take. For me, my ransom's death; On either side I come to spend my breath; Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again, But end it by some means for Imogen.
Great Jupiter be praised! Lucius is taken.'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,That gave the affront with them.
So 'tis reported:But none of 'em can be found. Stand! who's there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A Roman,Who had not now been drooping here, if secondsHad answer'd him.
Lay hands on him; a dog! A leg of Rome shall not return to tell What crows have peck'd them here. He brags his service As if he were of note: bring him to the king.
You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you;So graze as you find pasture.
Ay, or a stomach.
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art a way, think, to liberty: yet am I better Than one that's sick o' the gout; since he had rather Groan so in perpetuity than be cured By the sure physician, death, who is the key To unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter'd More than my shanks and wrists: you good gods, give me The penitent instrument to pick that bolt, Then, free for ever! Is't enough I am sorry? So children temporal fathers do appease; Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent? I cannot do it better than in gyves, Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy, If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take No stricter render of me than my all. I know you are more clement than vile men, Who of their broken debtors take a third, A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again On their abatement: that's not my desire: For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though 'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coin'd it: 'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp; Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake: You rather mine, being yours: and so, great powers, If you will take this audit, take this life, And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen! I'll speak to thee in silence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more, thou thunder-master, show Thy spite on mortal flies: With Mars fall out, with Juno chide, That thy adulteries Rates and revenges. Hath my poor boy done aught but well, Whose face I never saw? I died whilst in the womb he stay'd Attending nature's law: Whose father then, as men report Thou orphans' father art, Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him From this earth-vexing smart.
Lucina lent not me her aid, But took me in my throes; That from me was Posthumus ript, Came crying 'mongst his foes, A thing of pity!
Great nature, like his ancestry,Moulded the stuff so fair,That he deserved the praise o' the world,As great Sicilius' heir.
When once he was mature for man, In Britain where was he That could stand up his parallel; Or fruitful object be In eye of Imogen, that best Could deem his dignity?
With marriage wherefore was he mock'd, To be exiled, and thrown From Leonati seat, and cast From her his dearest one, Sweet Imogen?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why did you suffer Iachimo, Slight thing of Italy, To taint his nobler heart and brain With needless jealosy; And to become the geck and scorn O' th' other's villany?
For this from stiller seats we came, Our parents and us twain, That striking in our country's cause Fell bravely and were slain, Our fealty and Tenantius' right With honour to maintain.
Like hardiment Posthumus hath To Cymbeline perform'd: Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods, Why hast thou thus adjourn'd The graces for his merits due, Being all to dolours turn'd?
Thy crystal window ope; look out; No longer exercise Upon a valiant race thy harsh And potent injuries.
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,Take off his miseries.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peep through thy marble mansion; help; Or we poor ghosts will cry To the shining synod of the rest Against thy deity.
Help, Jupiter; or we appeal,And from thy justice fly.
No more, you petty spirits of region low, Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know, Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts? Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest Upon your never-withering banks of flowers: Be not with mortal accidents opprest; No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours. Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift, The more delay'd, delighted. Be content; Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift: His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent. Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade. He shall be lord of lady Imogen, And happier much by his affliction made. This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine: and so, away: no further with your din Express impatience, lest you stir up mine. Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.
He came in thunder; his celestial breath Was sulphurous to smell: the holy eagle Stoop'd as to foot us: his ascension is More sweet than our blest fields: his royal bird Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak, As when his god is pleased.
Thanks, Jupiter!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The marble pavement closes, he is enter'dHis radiant root. Away! and, to be blest,Let us with care perform his great behest.
[Waking] Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire, and begot A father to me; and thou hast created A mother and two brothers: but, O scorn! Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born: And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend On greatness' favour dream as I have done, Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve: Many dream not to find, neither deserve, And yet are steep'd in favours: so am I, That have this golden chance and know not why. What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one! Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment Nobler than that it covers: let thy effects So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers, As good as promise.
'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches, which, being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.' 'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing; Or senseless speaking or a speaking such As sense cannot untie. Be what it is, The action of my life is like it, which I'll keep, if but for sympathy.
Come, sir, are you ready for death?
Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hanging is the word, sir: ifyou be ready for that, you are well cooked.
So, if I prove a good repast to thespectators, the dish pays the shot.
A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is, you shall be called to no more payments, fear no more tavern-bills; which are often the sadness of parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in flint for want of meat, depart reeling with too much drink; sorry that you have paid too much, and sorry that you are paid too much; purse and brain both empty; the brain the heavier for being too light, the purse too light, being drawn of heaviness: of this contradiction you shall now be quit. O, the charity of a penny cord! It sums up thousands in a trice: you have no true debitor and creditor but it; of what's past, is, and to come, the discharge: your neck, sir, is pen, book and counters; so the acquittance follows.
I am merrier to die than thou art to live.
Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the tooth-ache: but a man that were to sleep your sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, I think he would change places with his officer; for, look you, sir, you know not which way you shall go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, indeed do I, fellow.
Your death has eyes in 's head then; I have not seen him so pictured: you must either be directed by some that take upon them to know, or do take upon yourself that which I am sure you do not know, or jump the after inquiry on your own peril: and how you shall speed in your journey's end, I think you'll never return to tell one.
I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes todirect them the way I am going, but such as wink andwill not use them.
What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the best use of eyes to see the way of blindness! I am sure hanging's the way of winking.
Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou bring'st good news; I am called to be made free.
I'll be hang'd then.
Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the dead.
Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets, I never saw one so prone. Yet, on my conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live, for all he be a Roman: and there be some of them too that die against their wills; so should I, if I were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good; O, there were desolation of gaolers and gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but my wish hath a preferment in 't.
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart That the poor soldier that so richly fought, Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast Stepp'd before larges of proof, cannot be found: He shall be happy that can find him, if Our grace can make him so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never saw Such noble fury in so poor a thing; Such precious deeds in one that promises nought But beggary and poor looks.
No tidings of him?
He hath been search'd among the dead and living,But no trace of him.
To my grief, I amThe heir of his reward;
which I will add To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain, By whom I grant she lives. 'Tis now the time To ask of whence you are. Report it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen: Further to boast were neither true nor modest, Unless I add, we are honest.
Bow your knees. Arise my knights o' the battle: I create you Companions to our person and will fit you With dignities becoming your estates.
There's business in these faces. Why so sadlyGreet you our victory? you look like Romans,And not o' the court of Britain.
Hail, great king!To sour your happiness, I must reportThe queen is dead.
Who worse than a physician Would this report become? But I consider, By medicine life may be prolong'd, yet death Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With horror, madly dying, like her life, Which, being cruel to the world, concluded Most cruel to herself. What she confess'd I will report, so please you: these her women Can trip me, if I err; who with wet cheeks Were present when she finish'd.
Prithee, say.
First, she confess'd she never loved you, only Affected greatness got by you, not you: Married your royalty, was wife to your place; Abhorr'd your person.
She alone knew this;And, but she spoke it dying, I would notBelieve her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love With such integrity, she did confess Was as a scorpion to her sight; whose life, But that her flight prevented it, she had Ta'en off by poison.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O most delicate fiend!Who is 't can read a woman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had For you a mortal mineral; which, being took, Should by the minute feed on life and lingering By inches waste you: in which time she purposed, By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to O'ercome you with her show, and in time, When she had fitted you with her craft, to work Her son into the adoption of the crown: But, failing of her end by his strange absence, Grew shameless-desperate; open'd, in despite Of heaven and men, her purposes; repented The evils she hatch'd were not effected; so Despairing died.
Heard you all this, her women?
We did, so please your highness.
Mine eyes Were not in fault, for she was beautiful; Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart, That thought her like her seeming; it had been vicious To have mistrusted her: yet, O my daughter! That it was folly in me, thou mayst say, And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou comest not, Caius, now for tribute that The Britons have razed out, though with the loss Of many a bold one; whose kinsmen have made suit That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter Of you their captives, which ourself have granted: So think of your estate.
Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day Was yours by accident; had it gone with us, We should not, when the blood was cool, have threaten'd Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives May be call'd ransom, let it come: sufficeth A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer: Augustus lives to think on't: and so much For my peculiar care. This one thing only I will entreat; my boy, a Briton born, Let him be ransom'd: never master had A page so kind, so duteous, diligent, So tender over his occasions, true, So feat, so nurse-like: let his virtue join With my request, which I make bold your highness Cannot deny; he hath done no Briton harm, Though he have served a Roman: save him, sir, And spare no blood beside.
I have surely seen him: His favour is familiar to me. Boy, Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace, And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore, To say 'live, boy:' ne'er thank thy master; live: And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt, Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it; Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner, The noblest ta'en.
I humbly thank your highness.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad;And yet I know thou wilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no: alack, There's other work in hand: I see a thing Bitter to me as death: your life, good master, Must shuffle for itself.
The boy disdains me, He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys That place them on the truth of girls and boys. Why stands he so perplex'd?
What wouldst thou, boy? I love thee more and more: think more and more What's best to ask. Know'st him thou look'st on? speak, Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?
He is a Roman; no more kin to me Than I to your highness; who, being born your vassal, Am something nearer.
Wherefore eyest him so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you pleaseTo give me hearing.
Ay, with all my heart,And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou'rt my good youth, my page;I'll be thy master: walk with me; speak freely.
Is not this boy revived from death?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One sand anotherNot more resembles that sweet rosy ladWho died, and was Fidele. What think you?
The same dead thing alive.
Peace, peace! see further; he eyes us not; forbear;Creatures may be alike: were 't he, I am sureHe would have spoke to us.
But we saw him dead.
Be silent; let's see further.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] It is my mistress:Since she is living, let the time run onTo good or bad.
Come, stand thou by our side;Make thy demand aloud.
Sir, step you forth; Give answer to this boy, and do it freely; Or, by our greatness and the grace of it, Which is our honour, bitter torture shall Winnow the truth from falsehood. On, speak to him.
My boon is, that this gentleman may renderOf whom he had this ring.
[Aside] What's that to him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That diamond upon your finger, sayHow came it yours?
Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken thatWhich, to be spoke, would torture thee.
How! me?
I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that Which torments me to conceal. By villany I got this ring: 'twas Leonatus' jewel; Whom thou didst banish; and—which more may grieve thee, As it doth me—a nobler sir ne'er lived 'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord?
All that belongs to this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That paragon, thy daughter,—For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spiritsQuail to remember—Give me leave; I faint.
My daughter! what of her? Renew thy strength:I had rather thou shouldst live while nature willThan die ere I hear more: strive, man, and speak.
Upon a time,—unhappy was the clock That struck the hour!—it was in Rome,—accursed The mansion where!—'twas at a feast,—O, would Our viands had been poison'd, or at least Those which I heaved to head!—the good Posthumus— What should I say? he was too good to be Where ill men were; and was the best of all Amongst the rarest of good ones,—sitting sadly, Hearing us praise our loves of Italy For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast Of him that best could speak, for feature, laming The shrine of Venus, or straight-pight Minerva. Postures beyond brief nature, for condition, A shop of all the qualities that man Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving, Fairness which strikes the eye—
I stand on fire:Come to the matter.
All too soon I shall, Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus, Most like a noble lord in love and one That had a royal lover, took his hint; And, not dispraising whom we praised,—therein He was as calm as virtue—he began His mistress' picture; which by his tongue being made, And then a mind put in't, either our brags Were crack'd of kitchen-trolls, or his description Proved us unspeaking sots.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, nay, to the purpose.
Your daughter's chastity—there it begins. He spake of her, as Dian had hot dreams, And she alone were cold: whereat I, wretch, Made scruple of his praise; and wager'd with him Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore Upon his honour'd finger, to attain In suit the place of's bed and win this ring By hers and mine adultery. He, true knight, No lesser of her honour confident Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring; And would so, had it been a carbuncle Of Phoebus' wheel, and might so safely, had it Been all the worth of's car. Away to Britain Post I in this design: well may you, sir, Remember me at court; where I was taught Of your chaste daughter the wide difference 'Twixt amorous and villanous. Being thus quench'd Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain 'Gan in your duller Britain operate Most vilely; for my vantage, excellent: And, to be brief, my practise so prevail'd, That I return'd with simular proof enough To make the noble Leonatus mad, By wounding his belief in her renown With tokens thus, and thus; averting notes Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet,— O cunning, how I got it!— nay, some marks Of secret on her person, that he could not But think her bond of chastity quite crack'd, I having ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon— Methinks, I see him now—
[Advancing] Ay, so thou dost, Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool, Egregious murderer, thief, any thing That's due to all the villains past, in being, To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison, Some upright justicer! Thou, king, send out For torturers ingenious: it is I That all the abhorred things o' the earth amend By being worse than they. I am Posthumus, That kill'd thy daughter:—villain-like, I lie— That caused a lesser villain than myself, A sacrilegious thief, to do't: the temple Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself. Spit, and throw stone s, cast mire upon me, set The dogs o' the street to bay me: every villain Be call'd Posthumus Leonatus; and Be villany less than 'twas! O Imogen! My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen, Imogen, Imogen!
Peace, my lord; hear, hear—
Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,There lie thy part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, gentlemen, help! Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus! You ne'er kill'd Imogen til now. Help, help! Mine honour'd lady!
Does the world go round?
How come these staggers on me?
Wake, my mistress!
If this be so, the gods do mean to strike meTo death with mortal joy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How fares thy mistress?
O, get thee from my sight;Thou gavest me poison: dangerous fellow, hence!Breathe not where princes are.
The tune of Imogen!
Lady,The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, ifThat box I gave you was not thought by meA precious thing: I had it from the queen.
New matter still?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It poison'd me.
O gods! I left out one thing which the queen confess'd. Which must approve thee honest: 'If Pisanio Have,' said she, 'given his mistress that confection Which I gave him for cordial, she is served As I would serve a rat.'
What's this, Comelius?
The queen, sir, very oft importuned me To temper poisons for her, still pretending The satisfaction of her knowledge only In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs, Of no esteem: I, dreading that her purpose Was of more danger, did compound for her A certain stuff, which, being ta'en, would cease The present power of life, but in short time All offices of nature should again Do their due functions. Have you ta'en of it?
Most like I did, for I was dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My boys,There was our error.
This is, sure, Fidele.
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?Think that you are upon a rock; and nowThrow me again.
Hang there like a fruit, my soul,Till the tree die!
How now, my flesh, my child!What, makest thou me a dullard in this act?Wilt thou not speak to me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Kneeling] Your blessing, sir.
[To GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS] Though you did lovethis youth, I blame ye not:You had a motive for't.
My tears that fallProve holy water on thee! Imogen,Thy mother's dead.
I am sorry for't, my lord.
O, she was nought; and long of her it wasThat we meet here so strangely: but her sonIs gone, we know not how nor where.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, Now fear is from me, I'll speak troth. Lord Cloten, Upon my lady's missing, came to me With his sword drawn; foam'd at the mouth, and swore, If I discover'd not which way she was gone, It was my instant death . By accident, had a feigned letter of my master's Then in my pocket; which directed him To seek her on the mountains near to Milford; Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments, Which he enforced from me, away he posts With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate My lady's honour: what became of him I further know not.
Let me end the story:I slew him there.
Marry, the gods forfend! I would not thy good deeds should from my lips Pluck a bard sentence: prithee, valiant youth, Deny't again.
I have spoke it, and I did it.
He was a prince.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A most incivil one: the wrongs he did me Were nothing prince-like; for he did provoke me With language that would make me spurn the sea, If it could so roar to me: I cut off's head; And am right glad he is not standing here To tell this tale of mine.
I am sorry for thee:By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd, and mustEndure our law: thou'rt dead.
That headless manI thought had been my lord.
Bind the offender,And take him from our presence.
Stay, sir king: This man is better than the man he slew, As well descended as thyself; and hath More of thee merited than a band of Clotens Had ever scar for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let his arms alone;They were not born for bondage.
Why, old soldier, Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for, By tasting of our wrath? How of descent As good as we?
In that he spake too far.
And thou shalt die for't.
We will die all three: But I will prove that two on's are as good As I have given out him. My sons, I must, For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech, Though, haply, well for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your danger's ours.
And our good his.
Have at it then, by leave.Thou hadst, great king, a subject whoWas call'd Belarius.
What of him? he isA banish'd traitor.
He it is that hathAssumed this age; indeed a banish'd man;I know not how a traitor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take him hence:The whole world shall not save him.
Not too hot:First pay me for the nursing of thy sons;And let it be confiscate all, so soonAs I have received it.
Nursing of my sons!
I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee: Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons; Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir, These two young gentlemen, that call me father And think they are my sons, are none of mine; They are the issue of your loins, my liege, And blood of your begetting.
How! my issue!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan, Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd: Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment Itself, and all my treason; that I suffer'd Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes— For such and so they are—these twenty years Have I train'd up: those arts they have as I Could put into them; my breeding was, sir, as Your highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile, Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children Upon my banishment: I moved her to't, Having received the punishment before, For that which I did then: beaten for loyalty Excited me to treason: their dear loss, The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir, Here are your sons again; and I must lose Two of the sweet'st companions in the world. The benediction of these covering heavens Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy To inlay heaven with stars.
Thou weep'st, and speak'st. The service that you three have done is more Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children: If these be they, I know not how to wish A pair of worthier sons.
Be pleased awhile. This gentleman, whom I call Polydore, Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius: This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus, Your younger princely son; he, sir, was lapp'd In a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand Of his queen mother, which for more probation I can with ease produce.
Guiderius hadUpon his neck a mole, a sanguine star;It was a mark of wonder.
This is he;Who hath upon him still that natural stamp:It was wise nature's end in the donation,To be his evidence now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, what, am I A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother Rejoiced deliverance more. Blest pray you be, That, after this strange starting from your orbs, may reign in them now! O Imogen, Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.
No, my lord; I have got two worlds by 't. O my gentle brothers, Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter But I am truest speaker you call'd me brother, When I was but your sister; I you brothers, When ye were so indeed.
Did you e'er meet?
Ay, my good lord.
And at first meeting loved;Continued so, until we thought he died.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the queen's dram she swallow'd.
O rare instinct! When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgement Hath to it circumstantial branches, which Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived you? And when came you to serve our Roman captive? How parted with your brothers? how first met them? Why fled you from the court? and whither? These, And your three motives to the battle, with I know not how much more, should be demanded; And all the other by-dependencies, From chance to chance: but nor the time nor place Will serve our long inter'gatories. See, Posthumus anchors upon Imogen, And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye On him, her brother, me, her master, hitting Each object with a joy: the counterchange Is severally in all. Let's quit this ground, And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
Thou art my brother; so we'll hold thee ever.
You are my father too, and did relieve me,To see this gracious season.
All o'erjoy'd,Save these in bonds: let them be joyful too,For they shall taste our comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My good master,I will yet do you service.
Happy be you!
The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought,He would have well becomed this place, and gracedThe thankings of a king.
I am, sir, The soldier that did company these three In poor beseeming; 'twas a fitment for The purpose I then follow'd. That I was he, Speak, Iachimo: I had you down and might Have made you finish.
[Kneeling] I am down again: But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee, As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you, Which I so often owe: but your ring first; And here the bracelet of the truest princess That ever swore her faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Kneel not to me:The power that I have on you is, to spare you;The malice towards you to forgive you: live,And deal with others better.
Nobly doom'd!We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law;Pardon's the word to all.
You holp us, sir,As you did mean indeed to be our brother;Joy'd are we that you are.
Your servant, princes. Good my lord of Rome, Call forth your soothsayer: as I slept, methought Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd, Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows Of mine own kindred: when I waked, I found This label on my bosom; whose containing Is so from sense in hardness, that I can Make no collection of it: let him show His skill in the construction.
Philarmonus!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, my good lord.
Read, and declare the meaning.
[Reads] 'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches, which, being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.' Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp; The fit and apt construction of thy name, Being Leonatus, doth import so much.
The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter, Which we call 'mollis aer;' and 'mollis aer' We term it 'mulier:' which 'mulier' I divine Is this most constant wife; who, even now, Answering the letter of the oracle, Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about With this most tender air.
This hath some seeming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline, Personates thee: and thy lopp'd branches point Thy two sons forth; who, by Belarius stol'n, For many years thought dead, are now revived, To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue Promises Britain peace and plenty.
Well My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius, Although the victor, we submit to Caesar, And to the Roman empire; promising To pay our wonted tribute, from the which We were dissuaded by our wicked queen; Whom heavens, in justice, both on her and hers, Have laid most heavy hand.
The fingers of the powers above do tune The harmony of this peace. The vision Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke Of this yet scarce-cold battle, at this instant Is full accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle, From south to west on wing soaring aloft, Lessen'd herself, and in the beams o' the sun So vanish'd: which foreshow'd our princely eagle, The imperial Caesar, should again unite His favour with the radiant Cymbeline, Which shines here in the west.
Laud we the gods; And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils From our blest altars. Publish we this peace To all our subjects. Set we forward: let A Roman and a British ensign wave Friendly together: so through Lud's-town march: And in the temple of great Jupiter Our peace we'll ratify; seal it with feasts. Set on there! Never was a war did cease, Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a peace.
Who’s there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Long live the king!
Barnardo?
He.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
For this relief much thanks. ‘Tis bitter cold,And I am sick at heart.
Have you had quiet guard?
Not a mouse stirring.
Well, good night.If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think I hear them.—Stand, ho! Who’s there?
Friends to this ground.
And liegemen to the Dane.
Give you good night.
O, farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Barnardo has my place. Give you good night.
Holla, Barnardo.
Say what, is Horatio there?
A piece of him.
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
I have seen nothing.
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us. Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.
Sit down a while And let us once again assail your ears, That are so fortified against our story, What we have two nights seen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sit we down,And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from the pole Had made his course t’ illume that part of heaven Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—
Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again!
In the same figure like the king that’s dead.
[to HORATIO] Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Looks it not like the king? Mark it, Horatio.
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
It would be spoke to.
Question it, Horatio.
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee, speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is offended.
See, it stalks away.
Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!
‘Tis gone and will not answer.
How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.Is not this something more than fantasy?What think you on ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Before my God, I might not this believeWithout the sensible and true avouchOf mine own eyes.
Is it not like the king?
As thou art to thyself. Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated. So frowned he once when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ‘Tis strange.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
In what particular thought to work I know not,But in the gross and scope of mine opinionThis bodes some strange eruption to our state.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good now, sit down and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for implements of war, Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint laborer with the day? Who is ’t that can inform me?
That can I. At least, the whisper goes so: our last king, Whose image even but now appeared to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet (For so this side of our known world esteemed him) Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of to the conqueror, Against the which a moiety competent Was gagèd by our king, which had returned To the inheritance of Fortinbras Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant And carriage of the article designed, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in ’t, which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
I think it be no other but e’en so. Well may it sort that this portentous figure Comes armèd through our watch so like the king That was and is the question of these wars.
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun, and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And even the like precurse of feared events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again.I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay, illusion!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If thou hast any sound or use of voice, Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which happily foreknowing may avoid, Oh, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay and speak!
—Stop it, Marcellus.
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
Do, if it will not stand.
‘Tis here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis here.
‘Tis gone. We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence, For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day, and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th’ extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine, and of the truth herein This present object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever ‘gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long. And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad. The nights are wholesome. Then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So have I heard and do in part believe it. But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill. Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen tonight Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning knowWhere we shall find him most conveniently.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, Th’ imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we—as ’twere with a defeated joy, With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks. Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleaguèd with the dream of his advantage, He hath not failed to pester us with message Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose —to suppress His further gait herein, in that the levies, The lists, and full proportions are all made Out of his subject; and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow. [gives them a paper] Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
In that and all things will we show our duty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
My dread lord, Your leave and favor to return to France, From whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your coronation, Yet now, I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laborsome petition, and at last Upon his will I sealed my hard consent. I do beseech you, give him leave to go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,And thy best graces spend it at thy will.—But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—
[aside] A little more than kin and less than kind.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Not so, my lord. I am too much i’ the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not forever with thy vailèd lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust. Thou know’st ’tis common. All that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam, it is common.
If it be,Why seems it so particular with thee?
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not “seems.” ‘Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ‘havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed “seem,” For they are actions that a man might play. But I have that within which passeth show, These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
‘Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father. But you must know your father lost a father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. ‘Tis unmanly grief. It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschooled. For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ‘Tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died today, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father. For let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne, And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire. And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark. —Madam, come. This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof No jocund health that Denmark drinks today But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Oh, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew, Or that the Everlasting had not fixed His canon ‘gainst self-slaughter! O God, God! How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on ’t, ah fie! ‘Tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this. But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two. So excellent a king, that was to this Hyperion to a satyr. So loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly.—Heaven and earth, Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on, and yet, within a month— Let me not think on ’t. Frailty, thy name is woman!— A little month, or ere those shoes were old With which she followed my poor father’s body, Like Niobe, all tears. Why she, even she— O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason Would have mourned longer!—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month, Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good, But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Hail to your lordship.
I am glad to see you well.—Horatio? Or I do forget myself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Sir, my good friend, I’ll change that name with you.And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—Marcellus!
My good lord.
[to MARCELLUS ] I am very glad to see you. [to BARNARDO] Good even, sir. [to HORATIO] —But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
A truant disposition, good my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself. I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.
I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow student.I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father—methinks I see my father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where, my lord?
In my mind’s eye, Horatio.
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
He was a man. Take him for all in all.I shall not look upon his like again.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw who?
My lord, the king your father.
The king my father?!
Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.
For God’s love, let me hear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch, In the dead waste and middle of the night, Been thus encountered: a figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie, Appears before them and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with them the third night kept the watch, Where—as they had delivered, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good— The apparition comes. I knew your father. These hands are not more like.
But where was this?
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Did you not speak to it?
My lord, I did, But answer made it none. Yet once methought It lifted up its head and did address Itself to motion, like as it would speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it shrunk in haste away And vanished from our sight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis very strange.
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true.And we did think it writ down in our dutyTo let you know of it.
Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.Hold you the watch tonight?
We do, my lord.
Armed, say you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Armed, my lord.
From top to toe?
My lord, from head to foot.
Then saw you not his face?
Oh yes, my lord. He wore his beaver up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, looked he frowningly?
A countenance moreIn sorrow than in anger.
Pale or red?
Nay, very pale.
And fixed his eyes upon you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most constantly.
I would I had been there.
It would have much amazed you.
Very like. Stayed it long?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Longer, longer.
Not when I saw ’t.
His beard was grizzled, no?
It was, as I have seen it in his life,A sable silvered.
I will watch tonight. Perchance‘Twill walk again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I warrant it will.
If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though Hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto concealed this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still. And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So fare you well. Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.
Our duty to your honor.
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
My father’s spirit in arms. All is not well. I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My necessaries are embarked. Farewell. And, sister, as the winds give benefit And convey is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.
Do you doubt that?
For Hamlet and the trifling of his favor, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, The perfume and suppliance of a minute. No more.
No more but so?
Think it no more. For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will, but you must fear. His greatness weighed, his will is not his own, For he himself is subject to his birth. He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself, for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state. And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed, which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmastered importunity. Fear it, Ophelia. Fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes. The canker galls the infants of the spring Too oft before their buttons be disclosed. And in the morn and liquid dew of youth, Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary, then. Best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall the effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads And recks not his own rede.
O, fear me not.
I stay too long. But here my father comes. A double blessing is a double grace. Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with thee. And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportioned thought his act. Be thou familiar but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel, But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatched, unfledged comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear ’t that th’ opposèd may beware of thee. Give every man thy ear but few thy voice. Take each man’s censure but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not expressed in fancy—rich, not gaudy, For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be, For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The time invites you. Go. Your servants tend.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember wellWhat I have said to you.
‘Tis in my memory locked,And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Farewell.
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
Marry, well bethought. ‘Tis told me he hath very oft of late Given private time to you, and you yourself Have of your audience been most free and bounteous. If it be so as so ’tis put on me— And that in way of caution—I must tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behooves my daughter and your honor. What is between you? Give me up the truth.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tendersOf his affection to me.
Affection! Pooh, you speak like a green girl,Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call them?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, I’ll teach you. Think yourself a baby That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly, Or—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, Running it thus—you’ll tender me a fool.
My lord, he hath importuned me with loveIn honorable fashion.
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go to.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both Even in their promise as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. F rom this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence. Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall obey, my lord.
The air bites shrewdly. It is very cold.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
What hour now?
I think it lacks of twelve.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, it is struck.
Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the seasonWherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
What does this mean, my lord?
The king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail and the swaggering upspring reels, And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.
Is it a custom?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, marry, is ’t. But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honored in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations. They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase Soil our addition. And indeed it takes From our achievements, though performed at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature in them— As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin), By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’erleavens The form of plausive manners— that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star, Their virtues else (be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo) Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.
Look, my lord, it comes!
Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee “Hamlet,” “King,” “Father,” “royal Dane.” O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher, Wherein we saw thee quietly interred, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous and we fools of nature, So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
It beckons you to go away with it,As if it some impartment did desireTo you alone.
Look, with what courteous actionIt waves you to a more removèd ground.But do not go with it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by no means.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
Do not, my lord.
Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life in a pin’s fee, And for my soul—what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea, And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? Think of it. The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It waves me still.—Go on. I’ll follow thee.
You shall not go, my lord.
Hold off your hands.
Be ruled. You shall not go.
My fate cries out And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve. Still am I called.—Unhand me, gentlemen. [draws his sword] By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me. I say, away! —Go on. I’ll follow thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He waxes desperate with imagination.
Let’s follow. ‘Tis not fit thus to obey him.
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, let’s follow him.
Where wilt thou lead me? Speak, I’ll go no further.
Mark me.
I will.
My hour is almost comeWhen I to sulfurous and tormenting flamesMust render up myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, poor ghost!
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearingTo what I shall unfold.
Speak. I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.
What?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am thy father’s spirit, Doomed for a certain term to walk the night And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fearful porpentine. But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy dear father love—
O God!
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Murder?
Murder most foul, as in the best it is.But this most foul, strange and unnatural.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swiftAs meditation or the thoughts of love,May sweep to my revenge.
I find thee apt, And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear. ‘Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forgèd process of my death Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.
O my prophetic soul! My uncle?
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen. O Hamlet, what a falling off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel linked, Will sate itself in a celestial bed And prey on garbage. But soft! Methinks I scent the morning air. Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment, whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body And with a sudden vigor doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine. And a most instant tetter barked about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched, Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled. No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head. Oh, horrible, oh, horrible, most horrible! If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not. Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damnèd incest. But howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once. The glowworm shows the matin to be near, And ‘gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.
O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I couple hell? Oh, fie! Hold, hold, my heart, And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember thee! Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past That youth and observation copied there, And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain! My tables!—Meet it is I set it down That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain. At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark. [writes] So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word. It is “Adieu, adieu. Remember me.” I have sworn ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, my lord!
Lord Hamlet—
Heaven secure him!
So be it.
Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hillo, ho, ho, boy. Come, bird, come.
How is ’t, my noble lord?
What news, my lord?
Oh, wonderful!
Good my lord, tell it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No. You’ll reveal it.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Nor I, my lord.
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think it?But you’ll be secret?
Ay, by heaven, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all DenmarkBut he’s an arrant knave.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the graveTo tell us this.
Why, right, you are in the right. And so, without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part. You, as your business and desire shall point you— For every man has business and desire, Such as it is—and for my own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
I’m sorry they offend you, heartily.Yes faith, heartily.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There’s no offense, my lord.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offense too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, Give me one poor request.
What is ’t, my lord? We will.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
My lord, we will not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but swear ’t.
In faith, my lord, not I.
Nor I, my lord, in faith.
Upon my sword.
We have sworn, my lord, already.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
[cries under the stage] Swear!
Ah, ha, boy! Sayst thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.Consent to swear.
Propose the oath, my lord.
Never to speak of this that you have seen.Swear by my sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][beneath] Swear.
Hic et ubique? Then we’ll shift our ground. Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Swear by my sword Never to speak of this that you have heard.
[beneath] Swear by his sword.
Well said, old mole! Canst work i’ th’ earth so fast?A worthy pioneer! Once more remove, good friends.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come, Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on), That you, at such times seeing me, never shall— With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out— to note That you know aught of me. This not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.
[beneath] Swear!
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit! —So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you, And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do, to express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let’s go together.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
I will, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,Before you visit him, to make inquireOf his behavior.
My lord, I did intend it.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir, Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris, And how, and who, what means, and where they keep What company at what expense; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question That they do know my son, come you more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him, As thus: “I know his father and his friends, And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Ay, very well, my lord.
“And in part him, but,” you may say, “not well. But, if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild. Addicted so and so. —” And there put on him What forgeries you please. Marry, none so rank As may dishonor him. Take heed of that. But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As gaming, my lord?
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.
My lord, that would dishonor him!
‘Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge. You must not put another scandal on him That he is open to incontinency. That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimèd blood, Of general assault.
But, my good lord—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore should you do this?
Ay, my lord. I would know that.
Marry, sir, here’s my drift: (And I believe it is a fetch of wit) You, laying these slight sullies on my son As ’twere a thing a little soiled i’ th’ working— Mark you, your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence: “Good sir” or so, or “Friend,” or “Gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.
Very good, my lord.
And then, sir, does he this, he does— What was I about to say? By the mass, I was about to say something. Wheredid I leave?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At “closes in the consequence,” at “‘friend,’Or so” and “‘gentleman.’”
At “closes in the consequence.” Ay, marry. He closes thus: “I know the gentleman. I saw him yesterday”—or “t’ other day,” Or then, or then, with such or such —“and, as you say, There was he gaming, there o’ertook in’s rouse, There falling out at tennis,” or, perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale”— Videlicet a brothel, or so forth. See you now, Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth. And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. So by my former lecture and advice Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
My lord, I have.
God be wi’ you. Fare you well.
Good my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Observe his inclination in yourself.
I shall, my lord.
And let him ply his music.
Well, my lord.
Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Ophelia? What’s the matter?
O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
With what, i’ th’ name of God?
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet, Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced; No hat upon his head; his stockings fouled, Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosèd out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
Mad for thy love?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I do not know.But truly, I do fear it.
What said he?
He took me by the wrist and held me hard. Then goes he to the length of all his arm, And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stayed he so. At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being. That done, he lets me go, And, with his head over his shoulder turned, He seemed to find his way without his eyes, For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And to the last bended their light on me.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures. I am sorry. What, have you given him any hard words of late?
No, my good lord. But as you did commandI did repel his fetters and deniedHis access to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That hath made him mad.I am sorry that with better heed and judgmentI had not quoted him. I feared he did but trifleAnd meant to wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy!By heaven, it is as proper to our ageTo cast beyond ourselves in our opinionsAs it is common for the younger sortTo lack discretion. Come, go we to the king.This must be known, which, being kept close, might moveMore grief to hide than hate to utter love.Come.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s “transformation”—so call it Since nor th’ exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from th’ understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat you both That, being of so young days brought up with him And since so neighbored to his youth and ‘havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus That, opened, lies within our remedy.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you. And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.
Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.
But we both obey And here give up ourselves, in the full bent, To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz. And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changèd son. Go, some of you, And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
Heavens make our presence and our practicesPleasant and helpful to him!
Ay, amen!
Th’ ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,Are joyfully returned.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king. And I do think—or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do—that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
Oh, speak of that. That do I long to hear.
Give first admittance to th’ ambassadors.My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath foundThe head and source of all your son’s distemper.
I doubt it is no other but the main:His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.
Well, we shall sift him.—Welcome, my good friends!Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared To be a preparation ‘gainst the Polack, But, better looked into, he truly found It was against your highness. Whereat grieved— That so his sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely borne in hand—sends out arrests On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give th’ assay of arms against your majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack, With an entreaty, herein further shown, That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down. [gives CLAUDIUS a document]
It likes us well, And at our more considered time we’ll read, Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your well-took labor. Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together. Most welcome home!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad. Mad call I it, for, to define true madness, What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad? But let that go.
More matter, with less art.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true. Tis true, ’tis pity, And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish figure, But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then. And now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause. Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend. I have a daughter—have while she is mine— Who in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise. [reads a letter] “To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia” —That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase. “Beautified” is a vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [reads the letter] “In her excellent white bosom, these,” etc.—
Came this from Hamlet to her?
Good madam, stay a while. I will be faithful. [reads the letter] “Doubt thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun doth move, Doubt truth to be a liar, But never doubt I love. O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, oh, most best, believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, Hamlet.” This in obedience hath my daughter shown me, And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But how hath she received his love?
What do you think of me?
As of a man faithful and honorable.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had seen this hot love on the wing— As I perceived it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me — what might you, Or my dear majesty your queen here, think, If I had played the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or looked upon this love with idle sight? What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy star. This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; And he, repelled—a short tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves And all we mourn for.
[to GERTRUDE] Do you think ’tis this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It may be, very like.
Hath there been such a time—I would fain know that—That I have positively said, “‘Tis so,”When it proved otherwise?
Not that I know.
[points to his head and shoulders] Take this from this if this be otherwise. If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the center.
How may we try it further?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You know sometimes he walks four hours togetherHere in the lobby.
So he does indeed.
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him. [to CLAUDIUS] Be you and I behind an arras then, Mark the encounter. If he love her not And be not from his reason fall’n thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state But keep a farm and carters.
We will try it.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away, I do beseech you, both away.I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Well, God-’a’-mercy.
Do you know me, my lord?
Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, my lord.
Then I would you were so honest a man.
Honest, my lord?
Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be oneman picked out of ten thousand.
That’s very true, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing carrion— Have you a daughter?
I have, my lord.
Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive—Friend, look to ’t.
[aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far gone, far gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love, very near this. I’ll speak to him again.[to HAMLET] What do you read, my lord?
Words, words, words.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter, my lord?
Between who?
I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
Slanders, sir. For the satirical rogue says here that old men have gray beards, that their faces are wrinkled,their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams —all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.
[aside] Though this be madness, yet there is method in ’t. [to HAMLET] Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Into my grave.
Indeed, that is out of the air. [aside] How pregnant sometimes his replies are. A happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.— [to HAMLET] My honorable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.
You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal—except my life, except my life, except my life.
Fare you well, my lord.
[aside] These tedious old fools!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
God save you, sir!
My honored lord!
My most dear lord!
My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern?Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do you both?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As the indifferent children of the earth.
Happy, in that we are not overhappy.On Fortune’s cap we are not the very button.
Nor the soles of her shoes?
Neither, my lord.
Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favors?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, her privates we.
In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true. She is astrumpet. What news?
None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.
Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me question more in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune that she sendsyou to prison hither?
Prison, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Denmark’s a prison.
Then is the world one.
A goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ th’ worst.
We think not so, my lord.
Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, your ambition makes it one. ‘Tis too narrow for your mind.
O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I havebad dreams.
Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
A dream itself is but a shadow.
Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to th’ court? For by my fay, I cannot reason.
We’ll wait upon you.
No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of myservants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, I ammost dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?
To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thankyou, and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come. Nay, speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What should we say, my lord?
Why, any thing, but to th’ purpose. You were sent for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to color. I know the good king and queen have sent for you.
To what end, my lord?
That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, andby what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal: be even and direct with me whether you were sentfor or no.
[to GUILDENSTERN] What say you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Nay, then, I have an eye of you—If you love me,hold not off.
My lord, we were sent for.
I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises, and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the air—look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire—why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors. What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an angel, in apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the world. The paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me. No, nor womanneither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
Why did you laugh then, when I said “man delights not me”?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you.We coted them on the way, and hither are they coming tooffer you service.
He that plays the king shall be welcome. His majesty shall have tribute of me. The adventurous knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sear, and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for ’t. What players are they?
Even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.
How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the lateinnovation.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was inthe city? Are they so followed?
No, indeed are they not.
How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace. But thereis, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
What, are they children? Who maintains ‘em? How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like if their means are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, there has been much to do on both sides, and thenation holds it no sin to tar them to controversy. There was, for a while, no money bid for argument unlessthe poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.
Is ’t possible?
Oh, there has been much throwing about of brains.
Do the boys carry it away?
Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is not very strange. For my uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would make mouths at him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. ‘Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.
There are the players.
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you in this garb—lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.
In what, my dear lord?
I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well be with you, gentlemen.
Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at each ear a hearer. [indicates POLONIUS] That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts
Happily he’s the second time come to them, for they sayan old man is twice a child.
[aside to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN] I will prophesyhe comes to tell me of the players. Mark it. [to POLONIUS] — You say right, sir. O’ Monday morning, ’twas so indeed.
My lord, I have news to tell you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in Rome—
The actors are come hither, my lord.
Buzz, buzz.
Upon my honor—
Then came each actor on his ass—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable,or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
What a treasure had he, my lord?
Why, One fair daughter and no more,The which he lovèd passing well.
[aside] Still on my daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well.
Nay, that follows not.
What follows, then, my lord?
Why, As by lot, God wot, and then, you know, It came to pass, as most like it was— The first row of the pious chanson will show you more, for look where my abridgement comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are welcome, masters, welcome, all! —I am glad to see thee well. —Welcome, good friends. —O old friend? Why,thy face is valenced since I saw thee last. Comest thouto beard me in Denmark? —What, my young lady and mistress! By ‘r Lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, benot cracked within the ring. —Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to ’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see. We’ll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
What speech, my good lord?
I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted. Or, if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the million. ‘Twas caviary to the general. But it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation, but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved. ‘Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido and thereabout of it, especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at this line—Let me see, let me see— The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast— It is not so. It begins with Pyrrhus— The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couchèd in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot Now is he total gules, horridly tricked With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damnèd light To their lord’s murder. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’ersizèd with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks. So, proceed you.
‘Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.
Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command. Unequal matched, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide, But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For, lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seemed i’ th’ air to stick. So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood, And, like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But as we often see against some storm A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region. So, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work. And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armor forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods In general synod take away her power, Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is too long.
It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prithee, sayon. He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on. Come to Hecuba.
But who, ah woe, who had seen the moblèd queen—
“The moblèd queen?”
That’s good. “Moblèd queen” is good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’erteemèd loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up— Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped, ‘Gainst fortune’s state would treason have pronounced. But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamor that she made, (Unless things mortal move them not at all) Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.
Look whe’e he has not turned his color and has tears in’s eyes.—Prithee, no more.
[to FIRST PLAYER] ‘Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest soon. [to POLONIUS] Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be wellused, for they are the abstract and brief chronicles ofthe time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
God’s bodykins, man, much better. Use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honor and dignity. The less they deserve,the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, sirs.
Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow. [to FIRST PLAYER] — Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play The Murder of Gonzago?
Ay, my lord.
We’ll ha ’t tomorrow night. You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and insert in ’t, could you not?
Ay, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.
My good friends, I’ll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
Good my lord.
Ay, so. Good-bye to you.
Now I am alone. Oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own conceit That from her working all his visage wanned, Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing— For Hecuba! What’s Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba That he should weep for her? What would he do Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid speech, Make mad the guilty and appall the free, Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, And can say nothing—no, not for a king, Upon whose property and most dear life A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me “villain”? Breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? Tweaks me by the nose? Gives me the lie i’ th’ throat As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! ‘Swounds, I should take it, for it cannot be But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall To make oppression bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain! O vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murdered, Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A stallion! Fie upon ’t, foh! About, my brain.—Hum, I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play Have, by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul that presently They have proclaimed their malefactions. For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks. I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil, and the devil hath power T’ assume a pleasing shape. Yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds More relative than this. The play’s the thing Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And can you by no drift of conference Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
He does confess he feels himself distracted.But from what cause he will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded. But with a crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.
Did he receive you well?
Most like a gentleman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question, but of our demandsMost free in his reply.
Did you assay him?To any pastime?
Madam, it so fell out, that certain players We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of joy To hear of it. They are about the court, And, as I think, they have already order This night to play before him.
‘Tis most true,And he beseeched me to entreat your MajestiesTo hear and see the matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart, and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose on to these delights.
We shall, my lord.
Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her father and myself (lawful espials) Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If ’t be the affliction of his love or no That thus he suffers for.
I shall obey you . And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honors.
Madam, I wish it may.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ophelia, walk you here. [to CLAUDIUS] Gracious, so please you, We will bestow ourselves. [to OPHELIA] Read on this book That show of such an exercise may color Your loneliness. —We are oft to blame in this, ‘Tis too much proved, that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er The devil himself.
[aside] Oh, ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word. O heavy burden!
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.
To be, or not to be? That is the question— Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And, by opposing, end them? To die, to sleep— No more—and by a sleep to say we end The heartache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wished! To die, to sleep. To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there’s the rub, For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause. There’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life. For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Th’ oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of th’ unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscovered country from whose bourn No traveler returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action. —Soft you now, The fair Ophelia! —Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remembered.
Good my lord,How does your honor for this many a day?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly thank you. Well, well, well.
My lord, I have remembrances of yoursThat I have longèd long to redeliver.I pray you now receive them.
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
My honored lord, you know right well you did, And with them, words of so sweet breath composed As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost, Take these again, for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.
Ha, ha, are you honest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
Are you fair?
What means your lordship?
That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.
Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
You should not have believed me, for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you not.
I was the more deceived.
Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder ofsinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in,imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earthand heaven? We are arrant knaves, all. Believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where’s your father?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At home, my lord.
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in ’s own house. Farewell.
O, help him, you sweet heavens!
If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry. Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go. Farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and quickly too. Farewell.
Heavenly powers, restore him!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God has given you one face and you make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and you lisp, you nickname God’s creatures and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep asthey are. To a nunnery, go.
Oh, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!— The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword, Th’ expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, Th’ observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That sucked the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatched form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy. Oh, woe is me, T’ have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
Love? His affections do not that way tend. Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul O’er which his melancholy sits on brood, And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger —which for to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England For the demand of our neglected tribute. Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. —How now, Ophelia? You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said. We heard it all. —My lord, do as you please. But, if you hold it fit, after the play Let his queen mother all alone entreat him To show his grief. Let her be round with him, And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear Of all their conference. If she find him not, To England send him or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.
It shall be so.Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently, for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say) whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. Oh, it offends me to the soul tohear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb-shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
I warrant your honor.
Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion beyour tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special observance that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature. For anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, bothat the first and now, was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature,scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come tardy off, though it make the unskillful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others . Oh, there be players that I have seen play and heard others praise (and that highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither having th’ accent of Christiansnor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well,they imitated humanity so abominably.
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.
O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them, for there be of them that will themselves laugh to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then to be considered. That’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, makeyou ready.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, my lord! Will the king hear this piece of work?
And the queen too, and that presently.
Bid the players make haste.
Will you two help to hasten them?
Ay, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What ho, Horatio!
Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a manAs e’er my conversation coped withal.
O my dear lord—
Nay, do not think I flatter. For what advancement may I hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flattered? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath sealed thee for herself, for thou hast been— As one in suffering all that suffers nothing— A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks. And blessed are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee. —Something too much of this.— There is a play tonight before the king. One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death. I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle. If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damnèd ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note. For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, my lord.If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
They are coming to the play. I must be idle.Get you a place.
How fares our cousin Hamlet?
Excellent, i’ faith, of the chameleon’s dish. I eat theair, promise-crammed. You cannot feed capons so.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, nor mine now.[to POLONIUS] My lord, you played once i’ th’ university, you say?
That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
What did you enact?
I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i’ th’ Capitol.Brutus killed me.
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there.—Be the players ready?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
No, good mother. Here’s metal more attractive. [sits next to OPHELIA]
[to CLAUDIUS] Oh, ho, do you mark that?
Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my lord.
I mean, my head upon your lap?
Ay, my lord.
Do you think I meant country matters?
I think nothing, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.
What is, my lord?
Nothing.
You are merry, my lord.
Who, I?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my lord.
O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do but bemerry? For, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.
Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens! Die two months ago andnot forgotten yet? Then there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year. But, by ‘r Lady, he must build churches then, or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, oh, for, oh, the hobby-horse is forgot.”
What means this, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means mischief.
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel. They’ll tell all.
Will he tell us what this show meant?
Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be not you ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you what it means.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the play.
For us and for our tragedy,Here stooping to your clemency,We beg your hearing patiently.
Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
‘Tis brief, my lord.
As woman’s love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbèd ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been, Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count o’er ere love be done. But woe is me! You are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must. For women fear too much, even as they love, And women’s fear and love hold quantity, In neither aught, or in extremity. Now what my love is, proof hath made you know, And as my love is sized, my fear is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear. Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too. My operant powers their functions leave to do. And thou shalt live in this fair world behind, Honored, beloved, and haply one as kind For husband shalt thou—
Oh, confound the rest! Such love must needs be treason in my breast. In second husband let me be accursed! None wed the second but who killed the first.
[aside] Wormwood, wormwood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The instances that second marriage move Are base respects of thrift, but none of love. A second time I kill my husband dead When second husband kisses me in bed.
I do believe you think what now you speak, But what we do determine oft we break. Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent birth, but poor validity, Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree, But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be. Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt. What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy. Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament. Grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change. For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love. The great man down, you mark his favorite flies. The poor advanced makes friends of enemies. And hitherto doth love on fortune tend, For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But, orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run That our devices still are overthrown. Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own. So think thou wilt no second husband wed, But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light. Sport and repose lock from me day and night. To desperation turn my trust and hope. An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope. Each opposite that blanks the face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy. Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
If she should break it now!
‘Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguileThe tedious day with sleep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sleep rock thy brain,And never come mischance between us twain.
Madam, how like you this play?
The lady protests too much, methinks.
Oh, but she’ll keep her word.
Have you heard the argument? Is there no offense in ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no, they do but jest. Poison in jest. No offense i’th’ world.
What do you call the play?
The Mousetrap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play is theimage of a murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke’sname, his wife Baptista. You shall see anon. ‘Tis a knavish piece of work, but what o’ that? Your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I could interpret between you and your love, if I couldsee the puppets dallying.
You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
It would cost you a groaning to take off mine edge.
Still better and worse.
So you must take your husbands.—Begin, murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come, “The croakingraven doth bellow for revenge—”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing, Confederate season, else no creature seeing, Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property On wholesome life usurp immediately. [pours poison into PLAYER KING ’s ears]
He poisons him i’ th’ garden for ’s estate. His name’s Gonzago. The story is extant, and writ in choice Italian. You shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.
The king rises.
What, frighted with false fire?
How fares my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give o’er the play.
Give me some light, away!
Lights, lights, lights!
Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungallèd play. For some must watch while some must sleep. So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players?
Half a share.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself. And now reigns here A very, very—pajock.
You might have rhymed.
O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
Very well, my lord.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did very well note him.
Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders! For if the king like not the comedy, Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy. Come, some music!
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Sir, a whole history.
The king, sir—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir, what of him?
Is in his retirement marvelous distempered.
With drink, sir?
No, my lord, with choler.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the doctor. For, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.
I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
The queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
You are welcome.
Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s commandment. If not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I cannot.
What, my lord?
Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command. Or, rather, as you say, my mother. Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother, you say—
Then thus she says: your behavior hath struck her into amazement and admiration.
O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration? Impart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any further trade with us?
My lord, you once did love me.
And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I lack advancement.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?
Ay, sir, but “While the grass grows—” The proverb is something musty—Oh, the recorders! Let me see one. [takes a recorder] [aside to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN] To withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the wind of me as if you would drive me into a toil?
O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I cannot.
I pray you.
Believe me, I cannot.
I do beseech you.
I know no touch of it, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with yourfingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony.I have not the skill.
Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me!You would play upon me. You would seem to know my stops. You would pluck out the heart of my mystery. You would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass. And there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak? ‘Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than apipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.
God bless you, sir.
My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a camel?
By th’ mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.
Methinks it is like a weasel.
It is backed like a weasel.
Or like a whale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very like a whale.
Then I will come to my mother by and by. [aside] They fool me to the top of my bent.—I will come by and by.
I will say so.
“By and by” is easily said.
Leave me, friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood And do such bitter business as the bitter day Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.— O heart, lose not thy nature, let not ever The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom. Let me be cruel, not unnatural. I will speak daggers to her but use none. My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites. How in my words somever she be shent, To give them seals never, my soul, consent!
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you. I your commission will forthwith dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow Out of his lunacies.
We will ourselves provide. Most holy and religious fear it is To keep those many, many bodies safe That live and feed upon your majesty.
The single and peculiar life is bound With all the strength and armor of the mind To keep itself from noyance, but much more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many. The cease of majesty Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw What’s near it with it. It is a massy wheel Fixed on the summit of the highest mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence, Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage.For we will fetters put upon this fear,Which now goes too free-footed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will haste us.
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet. Behind the arras I’ll convey myself To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him home. And, as you said (and wisely was it said) ‘Tis meet that some more audience than a mother— Since nature makes them partial—should o’erhear The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege. I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed And tell you what I know.
Thanks, dear my lord.
Oh, my offence is rank. It smells to heaven. It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t, A brother’s murder. Pray can I not. Though inclination be as sharp as will, My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, And, like a man to double business bound, I stand in pause where I shall first begin, And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood? Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy But to confront the visage of offence? And what’s in prayer but this twofold force, To be forestallèd ere we come to fall Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up. My fault is past. But oh, what form of prayer Can serve my turn, “Forgive me my foul murder?” That cannot be, since I am still possessed Of those effects for which I did the murder: My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. May one be pardoned and retain th’ offense? In the corrupted currents of this world Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice, And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above. There is no shuffling. There the action lies In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled, Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults, To give in evidence. What then? What rests? Try what repentance can. What can it not? Yet what can it when one can not repent? O wretched state! O bosom black as death! O limèd soul that, struggling to be free, Art more engaged! Help, angels. Make assay. Bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe. All may be well. [kneels]
Now might I do it pat. Now he is a-praying. And now I’ll do ’t. And so he goes to heaven. And so am I revenged.—That would be scanned. A villain kills my father, and, for that, I, his sole son, do this same villain send To heaven. Oh, this is hire and salary, not revenge. He took my father grossly, full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May. And how his audit stands who knows save heaven? But in our circumstance and course of thought ‘Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged To take him in the purging of his soul When he is fit and seasoned for his passage? No! Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent. When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage, Or in th’ incestuous pleasure of his bed, At game a-swearing, or about some act That has no relish of salvation in ’t— Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven, And that his soul may be as damned and black As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][rises] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him. Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your grace hath screened and stood between Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here. Pray you, be round with him.
[within] Mother, mother, mother!
I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming.
Now mother, what’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Why, how now, Hamlet?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s the matter now?
Have you forgot me?
No, by the rood, not so.You are the queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,And—would it were not so!—you are my mother.
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge.You go not till I set you up a glassWhere you may see the inmost part of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?Help, help, ho!
[from behind the arras] What, ho? Help, help, help!
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
[from behind the arras] Oh, I am slain.
O me, what hast thou done?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I know not. Is it the king?
Oh, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
A bloody deed? Almost as bad, good mother,As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As kill a king?
Ay, lady, ’twas my word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell. I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune. Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger. [to GERTRUDE] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace. Sit you down And let me wring your heart. For so I shall If it be made of penetrable stuff, If damnèd custom have not brassed it so That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongueIn noise so rude against me?
Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty, Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an innocent love And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows As false as dicers’ oaths —oh, such a deed As from the body of contraction plucks The very soul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words. Heaven’s face doth glow O’er this solidity and compound mass With tristful visage, as against the doom, Is thought-sick at the act.
Ay me, what actThat roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Look here upon this picture and on this, The counterfeit presentment of two brothers. See, what a grace was seated on this brow? Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself, An eye like Mars to threaten and command, A station like the herald Mercury New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill— A combination and a form indeed Where every god did seem to set his seal To give the world assurance of a man. This was your husband. Look you now, what follows. Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes? Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed And batten on this moor? Ha, have you eyes? You cannot call it love, for at your age The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble, And waits upon the judgment. And what judgment Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have, Else could you not have motion. But sure that sense Is apoplexed, for madness would not err, Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thralled, But it reserved some quantity of choice To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind? Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, Or but a sickly part of one true sense Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush? Rebellious hell, If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame When the compulsive ardor gives the charge, Since frost itself as actively doth burn, And reason panders will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Hamlet, speak no more! Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul, And there I see such black and grainèd spots As will not leave their tinct.
Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed, Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love Over the nasty sty—
O, speak to me no more!These words like daggers enter in my ears.No more, sweet Hamlet.
A murderer and a villain, A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe Of your precedent lord, a vice of kings, A cutpurse of the empire and the rule, That from a shelf the precious diadem stole, And put it in his pocket—
No more!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A king of shreds and patches—
Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious figure?
Alas, he’s mad!
Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by The important acting of your dread command? O, say!
Do not forget. This visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. But look, amazement on thy mother sits. O, step between her and her fighting soul. Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. Speak to her, Hamlet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How is it with you, lady?
Alas, how is ’t with you, That you do bend your eye on vacancy And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse? Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm, Your bedded hair, like life in excrements, Starts up and stands on end. O gentle son, Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?
On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares! His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones, Would make them capable. [to GHOST] Do not look upon me, Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects. Then what I have to do Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.
To whom do you speak this?
Do you see nothing there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.
Nor did you nothing hear?
No, nothing but ourselves.
Why, look you there! Look how it steals away—My father, in his habit as he lived—Look where he goes, even now, out at the portal!
This the very coinage of your brain.This bodiless creation ecstasyIs very cunning in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ecstasy? My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time And makes as healthful music. It is not madness That I have uttered. Bring me to the test, And I the matter will reword, which madness Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering unction to your soul That not your trespass but my madness speaks. It will but skin and film the ulcerous place Whilst rank corruption, mining all within, Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven. Repent what’s past. Avoid what is to come. And do not spread the compost on the weeds To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue, For in the fatness of these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
Oh, throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half. Good night—but go not to mine uncle’s bed. Assume a virtue if you have it not. That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, Of habits devil, is angel yet in this: That to the use of actions fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next abstinence, the next more easy. For use almost can change the stamp of nature, And either rein the devil or throw him out With wondrous potency. Once more, good night, And when you are desirous to be blessed, I’ll blessing beg of you. [points to POLONIUS] For this same lord, I do repent. But heaven hath pleased it so, To punish me with this and this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister. I will bestow him and will answer well The death I gave him. So, again, good night. I must be cruel only to be kind. Thus bad begins and worse remains behind. One word more, good lady—
What shall I do?
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do— Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed, Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out: That I essentially am not in madness But mad in craft. ‘Twere good you let him know, For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise, Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so? No, in despite of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket on the house’s top. Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, To try conclusions, in the basket creep And break your own neck down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be thou assured, if words be made of breathAnd breath of life, I have no life to breatheWhat thou hast said to me.
I must to England, you know that?
Alack,I had forgot. ‘Tis so concluded on.
There’s letters sealed, and my two schoolfellows, Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged, They bear the mandate. They must sweep my way And marshal me to knavery. Let it work, For ’tis the sport to have the engineer Hoist with his own petard. And ’t shall go hard, But I will delve one yard below their mines, And blow them at the moon. Oh, ’tis most sweet When in one line two crafts directly meet. [indicates POLONIUS] This man shall set me packing. I’ll lug the guts into the neighbor room. Mother, good night. Indeed this counselor Is now most still, most secret, and most grave Who was in life a foolish prating knave.— Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.— Good night, mother.
[to GERTRUDE] There’s matter in these sighs, these profound heaves. You must translate. ‘Tis fit we understand them. Where is your son?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN] Bestow this place on us a little while.
Ah, my good lord, what have I seen tonight!
What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit, Behind the arras hearing something stir, Whips out his rapier, cries, “A rat, a rat!” And in this brainish apprehension kills The unseen good old man.
O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there. His liberty is full of threats to all— To you yourself, to us, to everyone. Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered? It will be laid to us, whose providence Should have kept short, restrained and out of haunt, This mad young man. But so much was our love, We would not understand what was most fit, But, like the owner of a foul disease, To keep it from divulging, let it feed Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To draw apart the body he hath killed, O’er whom his very madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
O Gertrude, come away! The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch But we will ship him hence , and this vile deed We must, with all our majesty and skill, Both countenance and excuse. —Ho, Guildenstern!
Friends both, go join you with some further aid. Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain, And from his mother’s closet hath he dragged him. Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends, And let them know both what we mean to do And what’s untimely done. So dreaded slander— Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter, As level as the cannon to his blank, Transports the poisoned shot—may miss our name And hit the woundless air. Oh, come away! My soul is full of discord and dismay.
Safely stowed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][from within] Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?Oh, here they come.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thenceAnd bear it to the chapel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do not believe it.
Believe what?
That I can keep your counsel and not mine own. Besides,to be demanded of a sponge! What replication should be made by the son of a king?
Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Ay, sir, that soaks up the king’s countenance, his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I understand you not, my lord.
I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go withus to the king.
The body is with the king, but the king is not with thebody.The king is a thing—
A thing, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide, fox, and all after.
I have sent to seek him and to find the body. How dangerous is it that this man goes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him. He’s loved of the distracted multitude, Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes. And where ’tis so, th’ offender’s scourge is weighed, But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even, This sudden sending him away must seem Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all.
How now, what hath befall’n?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,We cannot get from him.
But where is he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
Bring him before us.
Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?
At supper.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At supper where?
Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures elseto fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service—two dishes, but to one table. That’s the end.
Alas, alas!
A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
What dost you mean by this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.
Where is Polonius?
In heaven. Send hither to see. If your messenger find him not there, seek him i’ th’ other place yourself. Butif indeed you find him not within this month, you shallnose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.
[to attendants] Go seek him there.
He will stay till ye come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety— Which we do tender as we dearly grieve For that which thou hast done—must send thee hence With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself. The bark is ready and the wind at help, Th’ associates tend, and everything is bent For England.
For England?
Ay, Hamlet.
Good.
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England.Farewell, dear mother.
Thy loving father, Hamlet.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife, man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.—Come, for England!
Follow him at foot. Tempt him with speed aboard. Delay it not. I’ll have him hence tonight. Away! For everything is sealed and done That else leans on the affair. Pray you, make haste.
And, England, if my love thou hold’st at aught— As my great power thereof may give thee sense, Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red After the Danish sword and thy free awe Pays homage to us — thou mayst not coldly set Our sovereign process, which imports at full, By letters congruing to that effect, The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England, For like the hectic in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done, Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king Tell him that, by his license, Fortinbras Craves the conveyance of a promised march Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous. If that his majesty would aught with us, We shall express our duty in his eye, And let him know so.
I will do ’t, my lord.
Go softly on.
Good sir, whose powers are these?
They are of Norway, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Against some part of Poland.
Who commands them, sir?
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,Or for some frontier?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly to speak, and with no addition, We go to gain a little patch of ground That hath in it no profit but the name. To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it. Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats Will not debate the question of this straw. This is th’ impostume of much wealth and peace, That inward breaks and shows no cause without Why the man dies. —I humbly thank you, sir.
God be wi’ you, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will ’t please you go, my lord?
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.
How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge! What is a man If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more. Sure, he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and godlike reason To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on th’ event— A thought which, quartered, hath but one part wisdom And ever three parts coward—I do not know Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do,” Sith I have cause and will and strength and means To do ’t. Examples gross as earth exhort me. Witness this army of such mass and charge Led by a delicate and tender prince, Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed Makes mouths at the invisible event, Exposing what is mortal and unsure To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly to find quarrel in a straw When honor’s at the stake. How stand I then, That have a father killed, a mother stained, Excitements of my reason and my blood, And let all sleep —while, to my shame, I see The imminent death of twenty thousand men, That for a fantasy and trick of fame Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, Which is not tomb enough and continent To hide the slain? Oh, from this time forth, My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!
I will not speak with her.
She is importunate,Indeed distract. Her mood will needs be pitied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would she have?
She speaks much of her father, says she hears There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her heart, Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing, Yet the unshaped use of it doth move The hearers to collection. They aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them, Indeed would make one think there might be thought, Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
‘Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strewDangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Let her come in.
[aside] To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is) Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss. So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?
How now, Ophelia?
[sings] How should I your true love know From another one? By his cockle hat and staff, And his sandal shoon.
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Say you? Nay, pray you, mark. [sings] He is dead and gone, lady, He is dead and gone, At his head a grass-green turf, At his heels a stone. Oh, ho!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but, Ophelia—
Pray you, mark. [sings]White his shroud as the mountain snow—
Alas, look here, my lord.
[sings]Larded all with sweet flowers,Which bewept to the ground did not goWith true-love showers.
How do you, pretty lady?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, God’ield you! They say the owl was a baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your table.
Conceit upon her father.
Pray you, let’s have no words of this, but when they ask you what it means, say you this: [sings] Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day, All in the morning betime, And I a maid at your window, To be your Valentine. Then up he rose, and donned his clothes, And dupped the chamber door. Let in the maid that out a maid Never departed more.
Pretty Ophelia—
Indeed, without an oath I’ll make an end on ’t: [sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity, Alack, and fie, for shame! Young men will do ’t, if they come to ’t. By Cock, they are to blame. Quoth she, “Before you tumbled me, You promised me to wed.” He answers, “So would I ha’ done, by yonder sun, An thou hadst not come to my bed.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long hath she been thus?
I hope all will be well. We must be patient, but I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall know of it, and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet ladies. Good night, good night.
Follow her close. Give her good watch, I pray you.
Oh, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs All from her father’s death, and now behold! O Gertrude, Gertrude, When sorrows come, they come not single spies But in battalions. First, her father slain. Next, your son gone, and he most violent author Of his own just remove. The people muddied, Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers For good Polonius’ death, and we have done but greenly In hugger-mugger to inter him. Poor Ophelia Divided from herself and her fair judgment, Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts. Last—and as much containing as all these— Her brother is in secret come from France, Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds, And wants not buzzers to infect his ear With pestilent speeches of his father’s death, Wherein necessity, of matter beggared, Will nothing stick our person to arraign In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this, Like to a murdering piece, in many places Gives me superfluous death.
Alack, what noise is this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
What is the matter?
Save yourself, my lord. The ocean, overpeering of his list, Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him “lord” And—as the world were now but to begin, Antiquity forgot, custom not known, The ratifiers and props of every word— They cry, “Choose we! Laertes shall be king!” Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds: “Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!”
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
The doors are broke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.
No, let’s come in!
I pray you, give me leave.
We will, we will.
I thank you. Keep the door.—O thou vile king,Give me my father!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Calmly, good Laertes.
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard, Cries “Cuckold!” to my father, brands the “harlot” Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow Of my true mother.
What is the cause, Laertes, That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?— Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person. There’s such divinity doth hedge a king That treason can but peep to what it would, Acts little of his will. —Tell me, Laertes, Why thou art thus incensed. —Let him go, Gertrude.— Speak, man.
Where is my father?
Dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But not by him.
Let him demand his fill.
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with. To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil! Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! I dare damnation. To this point I stand That both the worlds I give to negligence. Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged Most thoroughly for my father.
Who shall stay you?
My will, not all the world.And for my means, I’ll husband them so well,They shall go far with little.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Laertes, If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear father’s death, is ’t writ in your revenge, That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe, Winner and loser?
None but his enemies.
Will you know them then?
To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my armsAnd, like the kind life-rendering pelican,Repast them with my blood.
Why, now you speak Like a good child and a true gentleman. That I am guiltless of your father’s death And am most sensible in grief for it, It shall as level to your judgment pierce As day does to your eye.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now? What noise is that?
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt, Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye! By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight, Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May, Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia! O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits Should be as mortal as an old man’s life? Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis fine, It sends some precious instance of itself After the thing it loves.
[sings] They bore him barefaced on the bier, Hey, non nonny, nonny, hey, nonny, And in his grave rained many a tear. Fare you well, my dove.
Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,It could not move thus.
You must sing A-down a-down—And you, Call him a- down-a—Oh, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This nothing’s more than matter.
There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance. Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies, that’s for thoughts.
A document in madness. Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
There’s fennel for you, and columbines.—There’s rue foryou, and here’s some for me. We may call it “herb of grace” o’ Sundays.—Oh, you must wear your rue with a difference.— There’s a daisy. I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died. Theysay he made a good end [sings] For bonny sweet Robin isall my joy—
Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,She turns to favor and to prettiness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] And will he not come again? And will he not come again? No, no, he is dead, Go to thy deathbed. He never will come again. His beard was as white as snow, All flaxen was his poll. He is gone, he is gone, And we cast away moan, God ha’ mercy on his soul. — And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi’ ye.
Do you see this, O God?
Laertes, I must commune with your grief, Or you deny me right. Go but apart, Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will. And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me. If by direct or by collateral hand They find us touched, we will our kingdom give, Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours, To you in satisfaction. But if not, Be you content to lend your patience to us, And we shall jointly labor with your soul To give it due content.
Let this be so. His means of death, his obscure funeral— No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones, No noble rite nor formal ostentation— Cry to be heard as ’twere from heaven to earth, That I must call ’t in question.
So you shall.And where the offense is, let the great ax fall.I pray you, go with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What are they that would speak with me?
Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Let them come in.
I do not know from what part of the worldI should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
God bless you, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him bless thee too.
He shall, sir, an ’t please him. There’s a letter for you, sir— it comes from the ambassador that was bound for England—if your name be Horatio, as I am let to knowit is. [He gives HORATIO a letter]
[reads] “Horatio, When thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves tooslow of sail, we put on a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them. On the instant, they got clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner. They havedealt with me like thieves of mercy, but they knew whatthey did; I am to do a good turn for them. Let the kinghave the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb, yet arethey much too light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz andGuildenstern hold their course for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Fare-well. He that thou knowest thine, Hamlet.” Come, I will give you way for these your letters, And do ’t the speedier, that you may direct me To him from whom you brought them.
Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal, And you must put me in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, That he which hath your noble father slain Pursued my life.
It well appears. But tell me Why you proceeded not against these feats, So criminal and so capital in nature, As by your safety, wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirred up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, for two special reasons, Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed, But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother Lives almost by his looks, and for myself— My virtue or my plague, be it either which— She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul, That, as the star moves not but in his sphere, I could not but by her. The other motive Why to a public count I might not go, Is the great love the general gender bear him, Who, dipping all his faults in their affection, Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, Convert his gyves to graces —so that my arrows, Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where I had aimed them.
And so have I a noble father lost, A sister driven into desperate terms, Whose worth, if praises may go back again, Stood challenger on mount of all the age For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think That we are made of stuff so flat and dull That we can let our beard be shook with danger And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more. I loved your father, and we love ourself. And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—
How now, what news?
Letters, my lord, from Hamlet.This to your majesty, this to the queen. [gives CLAUDIUS letters]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From Hamlet? Who brought them?
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.They were given me by Claudio. He received themOf him that brought them.
Laertes, you shall hear them.—Leave us.
[reads] “High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on your kingdom. Tomorrowshall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes, when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return. Hamlet.” What should this mean? Are all the rest come back? Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
Know you the hand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked”?And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”Can you advise me?
I’m lost in it, my lord. But let him come. It warms the very sickness in my heart That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, “Thus diddest thou.”
If it be so, Laertes—As how should it be so? How otherwise?—Will you be ruled by me?
Ay, my lord—So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned, As checking at his voyage, and that he means No more to undertake it, I will work him To an exploit, now ripe in my devise, Under the which he shall not choose but fall. And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, But even his mother shall uncharge the practice And call it accident.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I will be ruledThe rather if you could devise it soThat I might be the organ.
It falls right. You have been talked of since your travel much— And that in Hamlet’s hearing—for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine. Your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.
What part is that, my lord?
A very ribbon in the cap of youth, Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness. Two months since, Here was a gentleman of Normandy. I’ve seen myself, and served against, the French, And they can well on horseback. But this gallant Had witchcraft in ’t. He grew unto his seat, And to such wondrous doing brought his horse As he had been encorpsed and demi-natured With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought, That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did.
A Norman was ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A Norman.
Upon my life, Lamond!
The very same.
I know him well. He is the brooch indeedAnd gem of all the nation.
He made confession of you, And gave you such a masterly report For art and exercise in your defense, And for your rapier most especially, That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed If one could match you. The ’scrimers of their nation, He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your sudden coming o’er, to play with him. Now, out of this—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What out of this, my lord?
Laertes, was your father dear to you?Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,A face without a heart?
Why ask you this?
Not that I think you did not love your father But that I know love is begun by time, And that I see, in passages of proof, Time qualifies the spark and fire of it. There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it. And nothing is at a like goodness still. For goodness, growing to a pleurisy, Dies in his own too-much. That we would do, We should do when we would, for this “would” changes And hath abatements and delays as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents. And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh That hurts by easing. —But to the quick of th’ ulcer: Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake To show yourself in deed your father’s son More than in words?
To cut his throat i’ th’ church.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize. Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your chamber. Hamlet returned shall know you are come home. We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence And set a double varnish on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on your heads. He, being remiss, Most generous and free from all contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, Or with a little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.
I will do ’t. And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword. I bought an unction of a mountebank, So mortal that, but dip a knife in it, Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, Collected from all simples that have virtue Under the moon, can save the thing from death That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly It may be death.
Let’s further think of this, Weigh what convenience both of time and means May fit us to our shape. If this should fail, And that our drift look through our bad performance, ‘Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project Should have a back or second that might hold If this should blast in proof.—Soft, let me see.— We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings.— I ha ’t! When in your motion you are hot and dry, As make your bouts more violent to that end, And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared him A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping, If he by chance escape your venomed stuck, Our purpose may hold there. —But stay, what noise?
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,So fast they follow.—Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.
Drowned? Oh, where?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is a willow grows aslant a brook That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream. There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples, That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call them. There, on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke, When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide, And mermaid-like a while they bore her up, Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element. But long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.
Alas, then she is drowned.
Drowned, drowned.
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet It is our trick. Nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will. When these are gone, The woman will be out. —Adieu, my lord. I have a speech of fire that fain would blaze, But that this folly doubts it.
Let’s follow, Gertrude. How much I had to do to calm his rage! Now fear I this will give it start again. Therefore let’s follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it Christian burial.
How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defense?
Why, ’tis found so.
It must be se offendendo. It cannot be else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act. And an act hath three branches—it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she drowned herself wittingly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver—
Give me leave. Here lies the water. Good. Here stands the man. Good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he goes. Mark you that. But if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
But is this law?
Ay, marry, is ’t. Crowner’s quest law.
Will you ha’ the truth on ’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, there thou sayst. And the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their even Christian. Come, myspade. There is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They hold up Adam’s profession.
Was he a gentleman?
He was the first that ever bore arms.
Why, he had none.
What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture? The Scripture says Adam digged. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another question to thee. If thouanswerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to.
What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
The gallows-maker, for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.
like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well, but how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the gallows may do wellto thee. To ’t again, come.
“Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Marry, now I can tell.
To ’t.
Mass, I cannot tell.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating. And when you are asked this question next, say “A grave-maker.” The houses that he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee in. Fetch me a stoup of liquor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][digs and sings] In youth when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet To contract–o–the time, for–a–my behove, Oh, methought, there–a–was nothing–a–meet.
Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He sings atgrave- making.
Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
‘Tis e’en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.
[sings] But age with his stealing steps Hath clawed me in his clutch, And hath shipped me into the land As if I had never been such. [throws up a skull]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That skull had a tongue in it and could sing once. How the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jawbone, that did the first murder! It might be the pateof a politician, which this ass now o’erreaches, one that would circumvent God, might it not?
It might, my lord.
Or of a courtier, which could say, “Good morrow, sweet lord!” “How dost thou, good lord?” This might be my LordSuch-a-one that praised my Lord Such-a-one’s horse whenhe meant to beg it, might it not?
Ay, my lord.
Why, e’en so. And now my Lady Worm’s, chapless and knocked about the mazard with a sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see ’t. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine ache to think on ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] A pickax and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding sheet, Oh, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet. [throws up another skull]
There’s another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillities, hiscases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with adirty shovel and will not tell him of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in ’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, hisfines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this thefine of his fines and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box, and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?
Not a jot more, my lord.
Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Ay, my lord, and of calfskins too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.I will speak to this fellow.—Whose grave’s this, sirrah?
Mine, sir. [sings]Oh, a pit of clay for to be madeFor such a guest is meet.
I think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in ’t.
You lie out on ’t, sir, and therefore it is not yours. For my part, I do not lie in ’t, and yet it is mine.
Thou dost lie in ’t, to be in ’t and say it is thine. ‘Tis for the dead, not for the quick. Therefore thou liest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis a quick lie, sir. ‘Twill away gain from me to you.
What man dost thou dig it for?
For no man, sir.
What woman, then?
For none, neither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is to be buried in ’t?
One that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she’s dead.
How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of it. The age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe. —How long hast thou been a grave-maker?
Of all the days i’ the year, I came to ’t that day thatour lastKing Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
How long is that since?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the very day that young Hamlet was born, he that is mad and sent into England.
Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
Why, because he was mad. He shall recover his wits there, or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.
Why?
‘Twill not be seen in him there. There the men are as mad as he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How came he mad?
Very strangely, they say.
How “strangely?”
Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
Upon what ground?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
How long will a man lie i’ the earth ere he rot?
Faith, if he be not rotten before he die—as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in— he will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine year.
Why he more than another?
Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade that he will keep out water a great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. [indicates a skull] Here’s a skull now. This skull has lain in the earth three-and-twenty years.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whose was it?
A whoreson mad fellow’s it was. Whose do you think it was?
Nay, I know not.
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! He poured a flagonof Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.
This?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]E’en that.
Let me see. [takes the skull] Alas, poor Yorick! I knewhim, Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath borne me on his back a thousandtimes, and now, how abhorred in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft. —Where be your gibes now? Your gambols? Your songs? Your flashes of merriment thatwere wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you tomy lady’s chamber and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh at that. —Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
What’s that, my lord?
Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this fashion i’ th’earth?
E’en so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And smelt so? Pah! [puts down the skull]
E’en so, my lord.
To what base uses we may return, Horatio. Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
‘Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
No, faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it, as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth to dust, the dust is earth, of earth we make loam —and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer barrel? Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away. Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall t’ expel the winter’s flaw! But soft, but soft a while.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the king, The queen, the courtiers—who is this they follow, And with such maimèd rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life. ‘Twas of some estate. Couch we a while and mark.
What ceremony else?
That is Laertes, a very noble youth, mark.
What ceremony else?
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful, And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her. Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home Of bell and burial.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Must there no more be done?
No more be done. We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.
Lay her i’ th’ earth, And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be When thou liest howling.
[to HORATIO] What, the fair Ophelia?
Sweets to the sweet. Farewell! [scatters flowers] I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife. I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid, And not have strewed thy grave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head, Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth awhile Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.
[comes forward] What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane. [leaps into the grave]
The devil take thy soul!
Thou pray’st not well. I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat, For though I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pluck them asunder.
Hamlet, Hamlet!
Gentlemen—
[to HAMLET] Good my lord, be quiet.
Why, I will fight with him upon this themeUntil my eyelids will no longer wag.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my son, what theme?
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothersCould not with all their quantity of loveMake up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
O, he is mad, Laertes.
For love of God, forbear him.
‘Swounds, show me what thou’lt do. Woo’t weep? Woo’t fight? Woo’t fast? Woo’t tear thyself? Woo’t drink up eisel, eat a crocodile? I’ll do ’t. Dost thou come here to whine, To outface me with leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her?—and so will I. And if thou prate of mountains let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is mere madness. And thus a while the fit will work on him. Anon, as patient as the female dove When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.
Hear you, sir. What is the reason that you use me thus? I loved you ever. But it is no matter. Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day.
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
[to LAERTES] Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech. We’ll put the matter to the present push.— Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.— This grave shall have a living monument. An hour of quiet shortly shall we see. Till then in patience our proceeding be.
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.You do remember all the circumstances?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Remember it, my lord?
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly— And praised be rashness for it: let us know Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well When our deep plots do pall, and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will—
That is most certain.
Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them, had my desire, Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again, making so bold (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal Their grand commission, where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health, and England’s too, With—ho!—such bugs and goblins in my life That, on the supervise (no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the ax) My head should be struck off.
Is ’t possible?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][shows HORATIO a document] Here’s the commission. Read it at more leisure.But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?
I beseech you.
Being thus benetted round with villainies— Ere I could make a prologue to my brains, They had begun the play—I sat me down, Devised a new commission, wrote it fair. I once did hold it, as our statists do, A baseness to write fair, and labored much How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know Th’ effect of what I wrote?
Ay, good my lord.
An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many suchlike “as’s” of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving time allowed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How was this sealed?
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal. Folded the writ up in form of th’ other, Subscribed it, gave ’t th’ impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea fight, and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to ’t.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment. They are not near my conscience. Their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow. ‘Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensèd points Of mighty opposites.
Why, what a king is this!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon— He that hath killed my king and whored my mother, Popped in between th’ election and my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life (And with such cozenage!) —is ’t not perfect conscience To quit him with this arm? And is ’t not to be damned To let this canker of our nature come In further evil?
It must be shortly known to him from EnglandWhat is the issue of the business there.
It will be short. The interim’s mine. And a man’s life’s no more than to say “one.” But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself, For by the image of my cause I see The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favors. But sure the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.
Peace.—Who comes here?
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly thank you, sir. [aside to HORATIO] Dost know this water-fly?
[aside to HAMLET] No, my good lord.
[aside to HORATIO] Thy state is the more gracious, for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess. ‘Tis a chough, but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a thing to you from His Majesty.
I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use. ‘Tis for the head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank your lordship. It is very hot.
No, believe me, ’tis very cold. The wind is northerly.
It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
Exceedingly, my lord. It is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his majesty bade me signify toyou that he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you, remember— [indicates that OSRIC should put on his hat]
Nay, good my lord, for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes, believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing. Indeed, to speakfeelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry,for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.
Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, thoughI know to divide him inventorially would dizzy th’ arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article, andhis infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror. And who else would trace him? His umbrage, nothing more.
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir?
[aside to HAMLET] Is ’t not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do ’t, sir, really.
What imports the nomination of this gentleman?
Of Laertes?
[aside to HAMLET] His purse is empty already. All ’s golden words are spent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of him, sir.
I know you are not ignorant—
I would you did, sir. Yet in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me. Well, sir?
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is—
I dare not confess that lest I should compare with him in excellence, but to know a man well were to know himself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation laidon him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.
What’s his weapon?
Rapier and dagger.
That’s two of his weapons. But well.
The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses, against the which he has impawned, as I take it,six French rapiers and poniards with their assigns—as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What call you the carriages?
[aside to HAMLET] I knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.
The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages—that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this “impawned,” as you call it?
The king, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweenyourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How if I answer “No”?
I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please His Majesty, ’tis the breathing time of day with me. Let thefoils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose. I will win for him an I can. If not, Iwill gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
Shall I redeliver you e’en so?
To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I commend my duty to your lordship.
Yours, yours.
He does well to commend it himself. There are no tongues else for ’s turn.
This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
He did comply, sir, with his dug before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them totheir trial, the bubbles are out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in thehall. He sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.
I am constant to my purpose. They follow the king’s pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.
The king and queen and all are coming down.
In happy time.
The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment toLaertes before you fall to play.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She well instructs me.
You will lose this wager, my lord.
I do not think so. Since he went into France, I have been in continual practice. I shall win at the odds. Butthou wouldst not think how ill all’s here about my heart. But it is no matter.
Nay, good my lord—
It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of gain-givingas would perhaps trouble a woman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
Not a whit. We defy augury. There’s a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come. If it be not to come, it will be now. If itbe not now, yet it will come—the readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves knows, what is ’t to leave betimes? Let be.
Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. [puts LAERTES’ hand into HAMLET’s]
Give me your pardon, sir. I’ve done you wrong. But pardon ’t, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, And you must needs have heard, how I am punished With sore distraction. What I have done, That might your nature, honor, and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness. Was ’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet. If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not. Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then? His madness. If’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged. His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house And hurt my brother.
I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive in this case should stir me most To my revenge. But in my terms of honor I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement Till by some elder masters, of known honor, I have a voice and precedent of peace To keep my name ungored. But till that time I do receive your offered love like love And will not wrong it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I embrace it freely,And will this brother’s wager frankly play.—Give us the foils. Come on.
Come, one for me.
I’ll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignoranceYour skill shall, like a star i’ th’ darkest night,Stick fiery off indeed.
You mock me, sir.
No, by this hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give them the foils, young Osric.—Cousin Hamlet,You know the wager?
Very well, my lord.Your grace hath laid the odds o’ th’ weaker side.
I do not fear it. I have seen you both.But since he is better we have therefore odds.
[tests a rapier] This is too heavy. Let me see another.
[tests a rapier] This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lord.
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire! The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath, And in the cup an union shall he throw Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups. And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king dunks to Hamlet.” Come, begin.— And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Come on, sir.
Come, my lord.
One.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No.
Judgment?
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Well, again.
Stay, give me drink.—Hamlet, this pearl is thine.Here’s to thy health.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give him the cup.
I’ll play this bout first. Set it by a while.Come.
Another hit. What say you?
A touch, a touch, I do confess ’t.
Our son shall win.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’s fat, and scant of breath.—Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet. [picks up the cup with the pearl]
Good madam.
Gertrude, do not drink.
I will, my lord. I pray you, pardon me. [drinks]
[aside] It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I dare not drink yet, madam. By and by.
Come, let me wipe thy face.
[aside to CLAUDIUS] My lord, I’ll hit him now.
I do not think ’t.
[aside] And yet it is almost ‘gainst my conscience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.I pray you, pass with your best violence.I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
Say you so? Come on.
Nothing, neither way.
Have at you now!
Part them! They are incensed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, come, again.
Look to the queen there, ho!
They bleed on both sides.—How is it, my lord?
How is ’t, Laertes?
Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric. I am justly killed with mine own treachery. [falls]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How does the queen?
She swoons to see them bleed.
No, no, the drink, the drink!—O my dear Hamlet!The drink, the drink! I am poisoned. [dies]
O villainy! Ho, let the door be locked.
Treachery! Seek it out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain. No medicine in the world can do thee good. In thee there is not half an hour of life. The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie, Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned. I can no more. The king, the king’s to blame.
The point envenomed too!—Then, venom, to thy work.
Treason! Treason!
O, yet defend me, friends. I am but hurt.
Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damnèd Dane,Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?Follow my mother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is justly served. It is a poison tempered by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet. Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me. [dies]
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.— I am dead, Horatio. —Wretched queen, adieu!— You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death, Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you— But let it be. —Horatio, I am dead. Thou livest. Report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.
Never believe it.I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.Here’s yet some liquor left. [lifts the poisoned cup]
As thou’rt a man, Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I’ll have ’t. [takes cup from HORATIO] O God, Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart Absent thee from felicity a while, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain To tell my story.
What warlike noise is this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,To th’ ambassadors of England givesThis warlike volley.
O, I die, Horatio. The potent poison quite o’ercrows my spirit. I cannot live to hear the news from England. But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice. So tell him, with th’ occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited. The rest is silence. O, O, O, O. [dies]
Now cracks a noble heart.—Good night, sweet prince,And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!—Why does the drum come hither?
Where is this sight?
What is it ye would see?If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?
The sight is dismal, And our affairs from England come too late. The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To tell him his commandment is fulfilled, That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead. Where should we have our thanks?
[indicates CLAUDIUS] Not from his mouth, Had it th’ ability of life to thank you. He never gave commandment for their death. But since so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived, give order that these bodies High on a stage be placèd to the view, And let me speak to th’ yet-unknowing world How these things came about. So shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on th’ inventors’ heads. All this can I Truly deliver.
Let us haste to hear it, And call the noblest to the audience. For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune. I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more. But let this same be presently performed, Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more mischance On plots and errors happen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage, For he was likely, had he been put on, To have proved most royally. And, for his passage, The soldiers’ music and the rites of war Speak loudly for him. Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss. Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
So shaken as we are, so wan with care, Find we a time for frighted peace to pant And breathe short-winded accents of new broils To be commenced in strands afar remote. No more the thirsty entrance of this soil Shall daub her lips with her own children’s blood. Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, Nor bruise her flow’rets with the armed hoofs Of hostile paces. Those opposèd eyes, Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven, All of one nature, of one substance bred, Did lately meet in the intestine shock And furious close of civil butchery Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, March all one way and be no more opposed Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies. The edge of war, like an ill-sheathèd knife, No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends, As far as to the sepulcher of Christ— Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross We are impressèd and engaged to fight— Forthwith a power of English shall we levy, Whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb To chase these pagans in those holy fields Over whose acres walked those blessèd feet Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed For our advantage on the bitter cross. But this our purpose now is twelve month old, And bootless ’tis to tell you we will go. Therefor we meet not now. Then let me hear Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland, What yesternight our council did decree In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question, And many limits of the charge set down But yesternight: when all athwart there came A post from Wales loaden with heavy news, Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer, Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight Against the irregular and wild Glendower, Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken, A thousand of his people butcherèd, Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, Such beastly shameless transformation By those Welshwomen done, as may not be Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broilBrake off our business for the Holy Land.
This matched with other did, my gracious lord. For more uneven and unwelcome news Came from the north and thus it did import: On Holy-rood Day, the gallant Hotspur there, Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald, That ever valiant and approvèd Scot, At Holmedon met, where they did spend A sad and bloody hour— As by discharge of their artillery And shape of likelihood the news was told; For he that brought them, in the very heat And pride of their contention did take horse, Uncertain of the issue any way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is a dear, a true-industrious friend, Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse. Stained with the variation of each soil Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours, And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news. The Earl of Douglas is discomfited; Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights, Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see On Holmedon’s plains . Of prisoners Hotspur took Mordake, Earl of Fife, and eldest son To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Atholl, Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith. And is not this an honorable spoil? A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?
In faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou mak’st me sad, and mak’st me sin In envy that my Lord Northumberland Should be the father to so blest a son, A son who is the theme of Honor’s tongue, Amongst a grove the very straightest plant, Who is sweet Fortune’s minion and her pride; Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him, See riot and dishonor stain the brow Of my young Harry. O, that it could be proved That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged In cradle-clothes our children where they lay, And called mine “Percy,” his “Plantagenet”! Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz, Of this young Percy’s pride? The prisoners, Which he in this adventure hath surprised To his own use he keeps, and sends me word I shall have none but Mordake, Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle’s teaching. This is Worcester, Malevolent to you in all aspects, Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this. And for this cause awhile we must neglect Our holy purpose to Jerusalem. Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we Will hold at Windsor. So inform the lords. But come yourself with speed to us again, For more is to be said and to be done Than out of anger can be utterèd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will, my liege.
Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old sack, and unbuttoning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benchesafter noon, that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day? Unless hours were cups of sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tonguesof bawds, and dials the signs of leaping-houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in flame-colored taffeta, I see no reason why thou shouldstbe so superfluous to demand the time of the day.
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, f or we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that wand'ring knight so fair. And I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as God save thy Grace—Majesty, I should say, for grace thou wilt have none—
What, none?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg and butter.
Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.
Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us that are squires of the night’s body be called thieves of the day’s beauty. Let us be Diana’s foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon, and let mensay we be men of good government, being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the fortune of us that are the moon’s men doth ebb and flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, by the moon. As for proof now: a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning, got with swearing “Lay by” and spent with crying “Bring in”; now in as low an ebb as the footof the ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And isnot a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
How now, how now, mad wag? What, in thy quips and thy quiddities? What a plague have I to do with a buff jerkin?
Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a time and oft.
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I’ll give thee thy due. Thou hast paid all there.
Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would not, I have used my credit.
Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent thatthou art heir apparent— But I prithee, sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when thou art king? And resolution thus fubbed as it is with the rusty curbof old father Antic the law? Do not thou, when thou artking, hang a thief.
No, thou shalt.
Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I’ll be a brave judge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou judgest false already: I mean thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves, and so become a rare hangman.
Well, Hal, well, and in some sort it jumps with my humor as well as waiting in the court, I can tell you.
For obtaining of suits?
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.
Or an old lion, or a lover’s lute.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy ofMoorditch?
Thou hast the most unsavory similes, and art indeed themost comparative, rascaliest, sweet young prince. But, Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought. An old lord of the council rated me the other day in the street about you, sir, but I markedhim not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in the street, too.
Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the streets and no man regards it.
O, thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able tocorrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm upon me, Hal,God forgive thee for it. Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man should speak truly,little better than one of the wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give it over. By the Lord, an I donot, I am a villain. I’ll be damned for never a king’s son in Christendom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?
Zounds, where thou wilt, lad. I’ll make one. An I do not, call me villain and baffle me.
I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying topurse-taking.
Why, Hal, ’tis my vocation, Hal. 'Tis no sin for a man to labor in his vocation.
Poins!—Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried “Stand!” to a true man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, sweet Hal.—What says Monsieur Remorse? What says Sir John Sack-and-Sugar? Jack, how agrees the devil and thee about thy soul that thou soldest him on Good Friday last for a cup of Madeira and a cold capon’sleg?
Sir John stands to his word. The devil shall have his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of proverbs. He will give the devil his due.
[To FALSTAFF] Then art thou damned for keeping thy wordwith the devil.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, my lads, my lads, tomorrow morning, by four o'clock, early at Gad’s Hill, there are pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders riding toLondon with fat purses. I have vizards for you all. Youhave horses for yourselves. Gadshill lies tonight in Rochester. I have bespoke supper tomorrow night in Eastcheap. We may do it as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff your purses full of crowns. If you willnot, tarry at home and be hanged.
Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not, I’ll hang you for going.
You will, chops?
Hal, wilt thou make one?
Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There’s neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou cam’st not of the blood royal, if thoudarest not stand for ten shillings.
Well then, once in my days I’ll be a madcap.
Why, that’s well said.
Well, come what will, I’ll tarry at home.
By the Lord, I’ll be a traitor then when thou art king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I care not.
Sir John, I prithee, leave the Prince and me alone. I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go.
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion, and him the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may move,and what he hears may be believed, that the true princemay, for recreation sake, prove a false thief, for the poor abuses of the time want countenance. Farewell. You shall find me in Eastcheap.
Farewell, thou latter spring. Farewell, All-hallown summer.
Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us tomorrow. Ihave a jest to execute that I cannot manage alone. Falstaff, Peto, Bardolph, and Gadshill shall rob those men that we have already waylaid. Yourself and I will not be there. And when they have the booty, if you and Ido not rob them, cut this head off from my shoulders.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner achieved but we’ll set upon them.
Yea, but ’tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits, and by every other appointment tobe ourselves.
Tut, our horses they shall not see; I’ll tie them in the wood. Our vizards we will change after we leave them. And, sirrah, I have cases of buckram for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I’ll forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be the incomprehensible liesthat this same fat rogue will tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty at least he fought with, what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this lies the jest.
Well, I’ll go with thee. Provide us all things necessary and meet me tomorrow night in Eastcheap. ThereI’ll sup. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
I know you all, and will awhile uphold The unyoked humor of your idleness. Yet herein will I imitate the sun, Who doth permit the base contagious clouds To smother up his beauty from the world, That, when he please again to be himself, Being wanted, he may be more wondered at By breaking through the foul and ugly mists Of vapors that did seem to strangle him. If all the year were playing holidays, To sport would be as tedious as to work, But when they seldom come, they wished for come, And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents. So when this loose behavior I throw off And pay the debt I never promisèd, By how much better than my word I am, By so much shall I falsify men’s hopes; And, like bright metal on a sullen ground, My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault, Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes Than that which hath no foil to set it off. I’ll so offend to make offense a skill, Redeeming time when men think least I will.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate, Unapt to stir at these indignities, And you have found me, for accordingly You tread upon my patience. But be sure I will from henceforth rather be myself, Mighty and to be feared, than my condition, Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, And therefore lost that title of respect Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves The scourge of greatness to be used on it, And that same greatness too which our own hands Have holp to make so portly.
My lord—
Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see Danger and disobedience in thine eye. O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, And majesty might never yet endure The moody frontier of a servant brow. You have good leave to leave us. When we need Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
[To NORTHUMBERLAND] You were about to speak.
Yea, my good lord. Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded, Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took, Were, as he says, not with such strength denied As is delivered to your Majesty: Either envy, therefore, or misprison Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My liege, I did deny no prisoners. But I remember, when the fight was done, When I was dry with rage and extreme toil, Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dressed, Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped Showed like a stubble land at harvest home. He was perfumèd like a milliner, And ’twixt his finger and his thumb he held A pouncet box, which ever and anon He gave his nose and took ’t away again, Who therewith angry, when it next came there, Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talked. And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by, He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly, To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse Betwixt the wind and his nobility. With many holiday and lady terms He questioned me; amongst the rest demanded My prisoners in your Majesty’s behalf. I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold, To be so pestered with a popinjay, Out of my grief and my impatience Answered neglectingly I know not what— He should, or he should not; for he made me mad To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman Of guns, and drums, and wounds—God save the mark!— And telling me the sovereignest thing on earth Was parmacety for an inward bruise, And that it was great pity, so it was, This villanous saltpeter should be digged Out of the bowels of the harmless earth, Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed So cowardly, and but for these vile guns He would himself have been a soldier. This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord, I answered indirectly, as I said, And I beseech you, let not his report Come current for an accusation Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.
The circumstance considered, good my lord, Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said To such a person and in such a place, At such a time, with all the rest retold, May reasonably die and never rise To do him wrong or any way impeach What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, But with proviso and exception That we at our own charge shall ransom straight His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer, Who, on my soul, hath willfully betrayed The lives of those that he did lead to fight Against that great magician, damned Glendower, Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then Be emptied to redeem a traitor home? Shall we buy treason and indent with fears When they have lost and forfeited themselves? No, on the barren mountains let him starve, For I shall never hold that man my friend Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
Revolted Mortimer! He never did fall off, my sovereign liege, But by the chance of war. To prove that true Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds, Those mouthèd wounds, which valiantly he took When on the gentle Severn’s sedgy bank In single opposition hand to hand He did confound the best part of an hour In changing hardiment with great Glendower. Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink, Upon agreement, of swift Severn’s flood, Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks, Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank, Bloodstainèd with these valiant combatants. Never did bare and rotten policy Color her working with such deadly wounds, Nor could the noble Mortimer Receive so many, and all willingly. Then let not him be slandered with revolt.
Thou dost belie him, Percy; thou dost belie him. He never did encounter with Glendower. I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone As Owen Glendower for an enemy. Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer. Send me your prisoners with the speediest means, Or you shall hear in such a kind from me As will displease you.— My lord Northumberland, We license your departure with your son.— Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An if the devil come and roar for them,I will not send them. I will after straightAnd tell him so, for I will ease my heart,Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile.Here comes your uncle.
Speak of Mortimer? Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul Want mercy if I do not join with him. Yea, on his part I’ll empty all these veins And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust, But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer As high in the air as this unthankful King, As this ingrate and cankered Bolingbroke.
[To WORCESTER] Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He will forsooth have all my prisoners, And when I urged the ransom once again Of my wife’s brother, then his cheek looked pale, And on my face he turned an eye of death, Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him. Was not he proclaimedBy Richard, that dead is, the next of blood?
He was; I heard the proclamation. And then it was when the unhappy King— Whose wrongs in us God pardon!—did set forth Upon his Irish expedition; From whence he, intercepted, did return To be deposed and shortly murderèd.
And for whose death we in the world’s wide mouthLive scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you. Did King Richard thenProclaim my brother Edmund MortimerHeir to the crown?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He did; myself did hear it.
Nay then, I cannot blame his cousin King That wished him on the barren mountains starve. But shall it be that you that set the crown Upon the head of this forgetful man And for his sake wear the detested blot Of murderous subornation—shall it be That you a world of curses undergo, Being the agents or base second means, The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather? O, pardon me that I descend so low To show the line and the predicament Wherein you range under this subtle King. Shall it for shame be spoken in these days, Or fill up chronicles in time to come, That men of your nobility and power Did gage them both in an unjust behalf (As both of you, God pardon it, have done) To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose, An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke? And shall it in more shame be further spoken That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off By him for whom these shames you underwent? No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem Your banished honors and restore yourselves Into the good thoughts of the world again, Revenge the jeering and disdain’d contempt Of this proud King, who studies day and night To answer all the debt he owes to you Even with the bloody payment of your deaths. Therefore I say—
Peace, cousin, say no more. And now I will unclasp a secret book, And to your quick-conceiving discontents I’ll read you matter deep and dangerous, As full of peril and adventurous spirit As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim! Send danger from the east unto the west, So honor cross it from the north to south, And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Imagination of some great exploitDrives him beyond the bounds of patience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon, Or dive into the bottom of the deep, Where fathom line could never touch the ground, And pluck up drownèd honor by the locks, So he that doth redeem her thence might wear Without corrival all her dignities. But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
[To NORTHUMBERLAND] He apprehends a world of figures here,But not the form of what he should attend.— [To HOTSPUR] Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
I cry you mercy.
Those same noble ScotsThat are your prisoners—
I’ll keep them all.By God, he shall not have a Scot of them.No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not.I’ll keep them, by this hand!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You start awayAnd lend no ear unto my purposes:Those prisoners you shall keep—
Nay, I will. That’s flat! He said he would not ransom Mortimer, Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer. But I will find him when he lies asleep, And in his ear I’ll hollo “Mortimer.” Nay, I’ll have a starling shall be taught to speak Nothing but “Mortimer,” and give it him To keep his anger still in motion.
Hear you, cousin, a word.
All studies here I solemnly defy, Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke. And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales— But that I think his father loves him not And would be glad he met with some mischance— I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale.
Farewell, kinsman. I’ll talk to youWhen you are better tempered to attend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To HOTSPUR] Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient foolArt thou to break into this woman’s mood,Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you, I am whipped and scourged with rods, Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke. In Richard’s time—what do you call the place? A plague upon it! It is in Gloucestershire. 'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept, His uncle York; where I first bowed my knee Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke. 'Sblood, when you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
At Berkley Castle.
You say true. Why, what a candy deal of courtesy This fawning greyhound then did proffer me: “Look when his infant fortune came to age,” And “gentle Harry Percy,” and “kind cousin.” O, the devil take such cozeners!— God forgive me! Good uncle, tell your tale. I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again.We will stay your leisure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have done, i' faith.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners: Deliver them up without their ransom straight, And make the Douglas' son your only mean For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons Which I shall send you written, be assured Will easily be granted.— ( to NORTHUMBERLAND ) You, my lord, Your son in Scotland being thus employed, Shall secretly into the bosom creep Of that same noble prelate, well beloved, The Archbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True; who bears hard His brother’s death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop. I speak not this in estimation, As what I think might be, but what I know Is ruminated, plotted, and set down, And only stays but to behold the face Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it. Upon my life, it will do well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Before the game is afoot thou still let’st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot.And then the power of Scotland and of YorkTo join with Mortimer, ha?
And so they shall.
In faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.
And ’tis no little reason bids us speed To save our heads by raising of a head, For, bear ourselves as even as we can, The King will always think him in our debt, And think we think ourselves unsatisfied, Till he hath found a time to pay us home. And see already how he doth begin To make us strangers to his looks of love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He does, he does. We’ll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell. No further go in this Than I by letters shall direct your course. When time is ripe, which will be suddenly, I’ll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer, Where you and Douglas and our powers at once, As I will fashion it, shall happily meet To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell, good brother. We shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, adieu: O, let the hours be shortTill fields and blows and groans applaud our sport.
Heigh-ho! An it be not four by the day, I’ll be hanged.Charles’s Wain is over the new chimney, and yet our horse not packed.—What, ostler!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Anon, anon.
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut’s saddle. Put a few flocks in the point. Poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots. This house is turned upside down since Robin ostler died.
Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose. It was the death of him.
I think this be the most villanous house in all London road for fleas. I am stung like a tench.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Like a tench? By the Mass, there is ne'er a king christen could be better bit than I have been since the first cock.
Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.
What, ostler, come away and be hanged. Come away.
I have a gammon of bacon and two races of ginger to be delivered as far as Charing Cross.
God’s body, the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.— What, ostler! A plague on thee! Hast thou never an eye in thy head? Canst not hear? An ’twere not as good deed as drink to break the pate on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged. Hast no faith in thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, carriers. What’s o'clock?
I think it be two o'clock.
I prithee, lend me thy lantern to see my gelding in thestable.
Nay, by God, soft. I know a trick worth two of that, i'faith.
[To SECOND CARRIER ] I pray thee, lend me thine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, when, canst tell? “Lend me thy lantern,” quoth he.Marry, I’ll see thee hanged first.
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee.Come, neighbour Mugs, we’ll call up the gentlemen. Theywill along with company, for they have great charge.
What ho, chamberlain!
[within] At hand, quoth pickpurse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s even as fair as “at hand, quoth the Chamberlain,” for thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction doth from laboring: thou layest the plot how.
Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that I told you yesternight: there’s a franklin in the Wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with him in gold. I heard him tell it to one of his company last night at supper—a kind of auditor, one that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what. They are up already and callfor eggs and butter. They will away presently.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks, I’ll give thee this neck.
No, I’ll none of it. I pray thee keep that for the hangman, for I know thou worshipest Saint Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If I hang, I’llmake a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang, old Sir Johnhangs with me, and thou knowest he is no starveling. Tut, there are other Troyans that thou dream’st not of, the which for sport sake are content to do the profession some grace, that would, if matters should be looked into, for their own credit sake make all whole. Iam joined with no foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers, none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms, but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner than pray, andyet, zounds, I lie, for they pray continually to their saint the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her but prey on her, for they ride up and down on her and make her their boots.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, the commonwealth their boots? Will she hold out water in foul way?
She will, she will. Justice hath liquored her. We stealas in a castle, cocksure. We have the receipt of fern seed; we walk invisible.
Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to thenight than to fern seed for your walking invisible.
Give me thy hand. Thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as I am a true man.
Nay, rather let me have it as you are a false thief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to. Homo is a common name to all men. Bid the ostlerbring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell, you muddyknave.
Come, shelter, shelter! I have removed Falstaff’s horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.
Stand close.
Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!
Peace, you fat-kidneyed rascal. What a brawling dost thou keep!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where’s Poins, Hal?
He is walked up to the top of the hill. I’ll go seek him.
I am accursed to rob in that thief’s company. The rascal hath removed my horse and tied him I know not where. If I travel but four foot by the square further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if I ’scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have forsworn his company hourly any time this two-and-twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the rogue’s company. If the rascal hath not given me medicines to make me love him, I’ll be hanged. It could not be else: I have drunk medicines.— Poins! Hal! A plague upon you both.—Bardolph! Peto!— I’llstarve ere I’ll rob a foot further. An ’twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leave theserogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with atooth. Eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me, and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough. A plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
Whew!
A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you rogues. Give me my horse and be hanged!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, you fat guts! Lie down, lay thine ear close to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the tread of travelers.
Have you any levers to lift me up again being down? 'Sblood, I’ll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot againfor all the coin in thy father’s Exchequer. What a plague mean you to colt me thus?
Thou liest. Thou art not colted; thou art uncolted.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good king’s son.
Out, you rogue! Shall I be your ostler?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent garters! If I be ta'en, I’ll peach for this. An I have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison—when a jest is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.
Stand.
So I do, against my will.
O, ’tis our setter. I know his voice, Bardolph. —What news?
Case you, case you. On with your vizards. There’s moneyof the King’s coming down the hill. 'Tis going to the King’s Exchequer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You lie, you rogue. 'Tis going to the King’s Tavern.
There’s enough to make us all.
To be hanged.
Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane. NedPoins and I will walk lower. If they ’scape from your encounter, then they light on us.
How many be there of them?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some eight or ten.
Zounds, will they not rob us?
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather, but yet no coward, Hal.
Well, we leave that to the proof.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge. When thou needest him, there thou shalt find him. Farewell, and stand fast.
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
[aside to POINS ] Ned, where are our disguises?
[aside to PRINCE HENRY ] Here, hard by. Stand close.
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I. Every man to his business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, neighbor, the boy shall lead our horses down the hill.We’ll walk afoot awhile and ease our legs.
Stand!
Jesus bless us!
Strike! Down with them! Cut the villains' throats! Ah, whoreson caterpillars, bacon-fed knaves, they hate us youth. Down with them! Fleece them!
O, we are undone, both we and ours forever!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang, you gorbellied knaves! Are you undone? No, you fat chuffs. I would your store were here. On, bacons, on! What, you knaves, young men must live. You are grandjurors, are you? We’ll jure you, faith.
The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou andI rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it would beargument for a week, laughter for a month, and a good jest forever.
Stand close, I hear them coming.
Come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse before day. An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards, there’s no equity stirring. There’s no more valor in that Poins than in a wild duck.
Your money!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Villains!
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse. The thieves are all scattered, and possessed with fear So strongly that they dare not meet each other. Each takes his fellow for an officer. Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death, And lards the lean earth as he walks along. Were ’t not for laughing, I should pity him.
How the fat rogue roared!
But, for mine own part, my lord, I could be well contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear your house. He could be contented; why is he not, then? In respect of the love he bears our house—he shows in this he loves his own barn better than he loves our house. Let me see some more. The purpose you undertake is dangerous. Why, that’s certain. 'Tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink; but I tell you, my lordfool, out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower,safety. The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great an opposition. Say you so, say you so? I say unto you again, you are a shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie. What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid, our friends true and constant—a good plot, good friends,and full of expectation; an excellent plot, very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is this! Why, my Lord of York commends the plot and the general course ofthe action. Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him with his lady’s fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself? Lord Edmund Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower? Is there not besides the Douglas? Have I not all their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month, and are they not some of them set forward already? What a pagan rascal isthis—an infidel! Ha, you shall see now in very sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the King and lay open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skimmilk with so honorable an action! Hang him, let him tell the King. We are prepared. I will set forward tonight.
How now, Kate? I must leave you within these two hours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my good lord, why are you thus alone? For what offense have I this fortnight been A banished woman from my Harry’s bed? Tell me, sweet lord, what is ’t that takes from thee Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep? Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth And start so often when thou sit’st alone? Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks And given my treasures and my rights of thee To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy? In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched, And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars, Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed, Cry “Courage! To the field!” And thou hast talk’d Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents, Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets, Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain, And all the currents of a heady fight. Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war, And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep, That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow Like bubbles in a late-disturbèd stream, And in thy face strange motions have appeared, Such as we see when men restrain their breath On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these? Some heavy business hath my lord in hand, And I must know it, else he loves me not.
What, ho!
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
What horse? A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.
That roan shall be my throne.Well, I will back him straight. O, Esperance!Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
But hear you, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say’st thou, my lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse,My love, my horse.
Out, you mad-headed ape! A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen As you are tossed with. In faith, I’ll know your business, Harry, that I will. I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir About his title, and hath sent for you To line his enterprise; but if you go—
—So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come, you paraquito, answer me Directly unto this question that I ask. In faith, I’ll break thy little finger, Harry, An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away! Away, you trifler. Love, I love thee not. I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world To play with mammets and to tilt with lips. We must have bloody noses and cracked crowns, And pass them current too.—Gods me, my horse!— What say’st thou, Kate? What would’st thou have with me?
Do you not love me? Do you not indeed? Well, do not then, for since you love me not, I will not love myself. Do you not love me? Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
Come, wilt thou see me ride? And when I am a-horseback, I will swear I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate, I must not have you henceforth question me Whither I go, nor reason whereabout. Whither I must, I must; and to conclude, This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate. I know you wise, but yet no farther wise Than Harry Percy’s wife; constant you are, But yet a woman; and for secrecy No lady closer, for I well believe Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know, And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
How? So far?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate, Whither I go, thither shall you go too. Today will I set forth, tomorrow you. Will this content you, Kate?
It must, of force.
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room and lend me thyhand to laugh a little.
Where hast been, Hal?
With three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the very bass stringof humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis. They take it already upon their salvation that though I be but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy, and tell me flatly am no proud jack, like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy—by the Lord, so they call me— and whenI am King of England, I shall command all the good ladsin Eastcheap. They call drinking deep “dyeing scarlet,”and when you breathe in your watering, they cry “Hem!” and bid you “Play it off!” To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour that I can drink with any tinker in his own language during my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost much honor that thou wertnot with me in this action; but, sweet Ned—to sweeten which name of Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar,clapped even now into my hand by an underskinker, one that never spake other English in his life than “Eight shillings and sixpence,” and “You are welcome,” with this shrill addition, “Anon, anon, sir.—Score a pint of bastard in the Half-moon,” or so. But, Ned, to drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee, do thou stand in some by-room while I question my puny drawer towhat end he gave me the sugar; and do thou never leave calling “Francis,” that his tale to me may be nothing but “Anon.” Step aside, and I’ll show thee a precedent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Francis!
Thou art perfect.
[within] Francis!
Anon, anon, sir.—Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
Come hither, Francis.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
Forsooth, five years, and as much as to—
[within] Francis!
Anon, anon, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Five year! By 'r lady, a long lease for the clinking ofpewter! But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant as to play the coward with thy indenture, and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?
O Lord, sir, I’ll be sworn upon all the books in England, I could find in my heart—
[within] Francis!
Anon, sir.
How old art thou, Francis?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me see. About Michaelmas next, I shall be—
[within] Francis!
Anon, sir. [To PRINCE HENRY ] Pray, stay a little, my lord.
Nay, but hark you, Francis, for the sugar thou gavest me,’twas a pennyworth, was ’t not?
O Lord, I would it had been two!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will give thee for it a thousand pound. Ask me when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
[within] Francis!
Anon, anon.
Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but tomorrow, Francis; or,Francis, o' Thursday; or indeed, Francis, when thou wilt.But, Francis—
My lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button, not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter, smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch—
O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink, for look you, Francis, your white canvas doublet will sully.In Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.
What, sir?
[within] Francis!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away, you rogue! Dost thou not hear them call?
What, stand’st thou still and hear’st such a calling? Look to the guests within.
My lord, old Sir John with half a dozen more are at thedoor.Shall I let them in?
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
Poins!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Anon, anon, sir.
Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at thedoor.Shall we be merry?
As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark you, what cunning match have you made with this jest of the drawer. Come, what’s the issue?
I am now of all humors that have showed themselves humors since the old days of Goodman Adam to the pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.
What’s o'clock, Francis?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Anon, anon, sir.
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy’s mind, the Hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his hands, and says to his wife “Fie upon this quiet life! I want work.” “O my sweet Harry,” says she, “how many hast thou killed today?” “Give my roan horse a drench,” says he, and answers “Some fourteen,” an hour after. “A trifle, a trifle.” I prithee, call in Falstaff. I’ll play Percy, and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his wife. “Rivo!” says the drunkard. Call in Ribs, call in Tallow.
Welcome, Jack. Where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too! Marry and amen!— Give me a cup of sack, boy.— Ere I lead this life long, I’ll sew netherstocks and mend them, andfoot them too. A plague of all cowards!— Give me a cup of sack, rogue! — Is there no virtue extant? (he drinketh)
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?—Pitiful-hearted Titan!—that melted at the sweet tale of the sun’s? If thou didst, then behold that compound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](to FRANCIS ) You rogue, here’s lime in this sack too.— There is nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man, yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack. Die when thou wilt. If manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring. There lives not three good men unhanged in England, andone of them is fat and grows old, God help the while. Abad world, I say. I would I were a weaver. I could singpsalms, or anything. A plague of all cowards, I say still.
How now, woolsack, what mutter you?
A King’s son! If I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese, I’ll never wear hair onmy face more. You, Prince of Wales!
Why, you whoreson round man, what’s the matter?
Are not you a coward? Answer me to that—and Poins there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Zounds, ye fat paunch, an you call me coward, by the Lord,I’ll stab thee.
I call thee coward? I’ll see thee damned ere I call thee coward, but I would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight enough in the shoulders you care not who sees your back. Call you that backing of your friends? A plague upon such backing! Give me them that will face me.— Give me a cup of sack.—I am a rogue if I drunk today.
O villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunk’st last.
All is one for that. [he drinketh] A plague of all cowards, still say I.
What’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s the matter? There be four of us here have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
Where is it, Jack? Where is it?
Where is it? Taken from us it is. A hundred upon poor four of us.
What, a hundred, man?
I am a rogue if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two hours together. I have ’scaped by miracle. Iam eight times thrust through the doublet, four throughthe hose, my buckler cut through and through, my sword hacked like a handsaw. Ecce signum! I never dealt bettersince I was a man. All would not do. A plague of all cowards! (points to GADSHILL, PETO and BARDOLPH ) Let them speak. If they speak more or less than truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak, sirs, how was it?
We four set upon some dozen.
Sixteen at least, my lord.
And bound them.
No, no, they were not bound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am aJew else, an Ebrew Jew.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
All? I know not what you call all, but if I fought not with fifty of them I am a bunch of radish. If there werenot two- or three-and-fifty upon poor old Jack, then amI no two-legged creature.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Nay, that’s past praying for. I have peppered two of them. Two I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a lie, spitin my face, call me horse. Thou knowest my old ward. Here I lay, and thus I bore my point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me.
What, four? Thou saidst but two even now.
Four, Hal, I told thee four.
Ay, ay, he said four.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me. I made me no more ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.
Seven? Why there were but four even now.
In buckram?
Ay, four in buckram suits.
Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to POINS ] Prithee, let him alone. We shall havemore anon.
Dost thou hear me, Hal?
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine in buckram that I told thee of—
So, two more already.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Their points being broken—
Down fell their hose.
Began to give me ground, but I followed me close, came in foot and hand, and with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.
O monstrous! Eleven buckram men grown out of two!
But as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in Kendal green came at my back, and let drive atme, for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These lies are like their father that begets them, gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thou claybrained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou whoreson,obscene, greasy tallow-catch—
What, art thou mad? Art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand? Come,tell us your reason. What sayest thou to this?
Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.
What, upon compulsion? Zounds, an I were at the strappado or all the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on compulsion?If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker, this huge hill of flesh—
'Sblood, you starveling, you elfskin, you dried neat’s tongue, you bull’s pizzle, you stockfish! O, for breath to utter what is like thee! You tailor’s-yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile standing tuck—
Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again, and when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.
Mark, Jack.
We two saw you four set on four, and bound them and were masters of their wealth. Mark now how a plain tale shall put you down. Then did we two set on you four and,with a word, outfaced you from your prize, and have it;yea, and can show it you here in the house. And, Falstaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy, and still run androared, as ever I heard bull-calf. What a slave art thou to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight! What trick, what device, what starting-hole canst thou now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, let’s hear, Jack. What trick hast thou now?
By the Lord, I knew you as well as he that made you. Why, hear you, my masters, was it for me to kill the heirapparent? Should I turn upon the true Prince? Why, thouknowest I am as valiant as Hercules, but beware instinct. The lion will not touch the true Prince. Instinct is a great matter. I was now a coward on instinct. I shall think the better of myself, and thee, during my life—I for a valiant lion, and thou for a truePrince. But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money.—Hostess, clap to the doors.— Watch tonight, pray to-morrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all thetitles of good fellowship come to you. What, shall we be merry? hall we have a play extempore?
Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.
Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me.
O Jesu, my lord the Prince!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, my lady the hostess, what sayest thou to me?
Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at door would speak with you. He says he comes from your father.
Give him as much as will make him a royal man and send him back again to my mother.
What manner of man is he?
An old man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What doth Gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall I give him his answer?
Prithee do, Jack.
Faith, and I’ll send him packing.
Now, sirs. By 'r lady, you fought fair.—So did you, Peto.— So did you, Bardolph.—You are lions too. You ran away upon instinct. You will not touch the true Prince. No, fie!
Faith, I ran when I saw others run.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff’s sword so hacked?
Why, he hacked it with his dagger and said he would swear truth out of England but he would make you believeit was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
Yea, and to tickle our noses with speargrass to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true men. I did that I didnot this seven year before: I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.
O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since thouhast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou ran’st away. What instinct hadst thou for it?
My lord, do you see these meteors? Do you behold these exhalations?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do.
What think you they portend?
Hot livers and cold purses.
Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
No, if rightly taken, halter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes lean Jack. Here comes bare-bone.—How now, mysweet creature of bombast? How long is ’t ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
My own knee? When I was about thy years, Hal, I was notan eagle’s talon in the waist. I could have crept into any alderman’s thumb-ring. A plague of sighing and grief! It blows a man up like a bladder. There’s villanous news abroad. Here was Sir John Bracy from yourfather. You must to the court in the morning. That samemad fellow of the north, Percy, and he of Wales that gave Amamon the bastinado, and made Lucifer cuckold, andswore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh hook—what a plague call you him?
Owen Glendower.
Owen, Owen, the same, and his son-in-law Mortimer, and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs a-horseback up a hill perpendicular—
He that rides at high speed, and with his pistol kills a sparrow flying.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have hit it.
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him. He will not run.
Why, what a rascal art thou then to praise him so for running?
A-horseback, you cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
I grant you, upon instinct. Well, he is there too, and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more: Worcester isstolen away tonight. Thy father’s beard is turned whitewith the news. You may buy land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
Why, then, it is like if there come a hot June, and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.
By the Mass, thou sayest true. It is like we shall havegood trading that way. But tell me, Hal, art not thou horrible afeard? Thou being heir apparent, could the world pick thee out three such enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou not horribly afraid? Doth not thy blood thrill at it?
Not a whit, i' faith; I lack some of thy instinct.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou comest to thy father. If thou love me, practice an answer.
Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the particulars of my life.
Shall I? Content. This chair shall be my state, this dagger my scepter, and this cushion my crown.
Thy state is taken for a joined stool, thy golden scepter for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich crownfor a pitiful bald crown.
Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt thou be moved.—Give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, here is my leg.
And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.
O the father, how he holds his countenance!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For God’s sake, lords, convey my tristful queen,For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as everI see.
Peace, good pint-pot. Peace, good tickle-brain.— (to PRINCE HENRY ) Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou art accompanied. For though the camomile, the more it is trodden on, the faster it grows, so youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. That thou art my son I have partly thy mother’s word, partly my own opinion, but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a foolish-hanging of thy nether lip that doth warrant me. If then thou be sonto me, here lies the point: why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries? A question not to be asked. Shall the sun of England prove a thief and take purses? A question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry, which thou hast often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch, asancient writers do report, doth defile; so doth the company thou keepest. For, Harry, now I do not speak to thee, in drink but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion; not in words only, but in woes also. And yet there is a virtuous man whom I have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.
What manner of man, an it like your Majesty?
A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage, and, as I think, his age some fifty, or, by 'rLady, inclining to three score; and now I remember me, his name is Falstaff. If that man should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me, for, Harry, I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then peremptorily I speak it: there is virtue in that Falstaff; him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast thou been this month?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me, and I’ll play my father.
Depose me? If thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by theheels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter’s hare.
Well, here I am set.
And here I stand. — [To the others] Judge, my masters.
Now, Harry, whence come you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
'Sblood, my lord, they are false.— [To the others] Nay,I’ll tickle you for a young prince, i' faith.
Swearest thou? Ungracious boy, henceforth ne'er look onme. Thou art violently carried away from grace. There is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man. A tun of man is thy companion. Why dost thou converse with that trunk of humors, that bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed cloakbag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly, that reverend Vice, that gray iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in years? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? Wherein neat and cleanly but to carve a capon and eat it? Wherein cunningbut in craft? Wherein crafty but in villany? Wherein villanous but in all things? Wherein worthy but in nothing?
I would your Grace would take me with you. Whom means your Grace?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That villanous abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff,that old white-bearded Satan.
My lord, the man I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say I know more harm in him than in myself were to say more than I know. That he is old, the more the pity; his white hairs do witness it. But that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked.If to be old and merry be a sin, then many an old host that I know is damned. If to be fat be to be hated, thenPharaoh’s lean kine are to be loved. No, my good lord, banish Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poins, but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant being, as he is old Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry’s company, banish not him thy Harry’s company. Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
I do, I will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, my lord, my lord, the Sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the door.
Out, you rogue.—Play out the play. I have much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
O Jesu, my lord, my lord—
Heigh, heigh, the devil rides upon a fiddlestick. What’s the matter?
The Sheriff and all the watch are at the door. They arecome to search the house. Shall I let them in?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou hear, Hal? Never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit. Thou art essentially made, without seeming so.
And thou a natural coward without instinct.
I deny your major. If you will deny the Sheriff, so; ifnot, let him enter. If I become not a cart as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up. I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
Go, hide thee behind the arras. The rest walk up above.—Now, my masters, for a true face and good conscience.
Both which I have had, but their date is out; and therefore I’ll hide me. [he hides behind the arras]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call in the Sheriff.
Now, Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?
First pardon me, my lord. A hue and cryHath followed certain men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known, my gracious lord,A gross fat man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As fat as butter.
The man, I do assure you is not here, For I myself at this time have employed him. And, Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee That I will by tomorrow dinner time Send him to answer thee or any man For any thing he shall be charged withal. And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemenHave in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so. If he have robbed these men,He shall be answerable; and so farewell.
Good night, my noble lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul’s. Go call him forth.
Falstaff!— [pulls back the arras] Fast asleep behind the arras, and snorting like a horse.
Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What hast thou found?
Nothing but papers, my lord.
Let’s see what they be. Read them.
(reads) Item, a capon, … 2s. 2d. Item, sauce, … 4d. Item, sack, two gallons, … 5s. 8d. Item, anchovies and sack after supper, , , , 2s. 6d. Item, bread, ob.
O monstrous! But one halfpennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack! What there is else, keep close. We’ll read it at more advantage. There let him sleep till day. I’ll to the court in the morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place shall be honorable. I’ll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot, and I knowhis death will be a march of twelve score. The money shall be paid back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in the morning, and so good morrow, Peto.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, good my lord.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower,Will you sit down? And Uncle Worcester—A plague upon it, I have forgot the map.
No, here it is. Sit, cousin Percy Sit, good cousin Hotspur, for by that name As oft as Lancaster doth speak of you His cheek looks pale and with a rising sigh He wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell,As oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot blame him. At my nativity The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, Of burning cressets, and at my birth The frame and huge foundation of the earth Shaked like a coward.
Why, so it would have doneAt the same season if your mother’s catHad but kittened, though yourself had never been born.
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire; the earth did tremble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire, And not in fear of your nativity. Diseas—d nature oftentimes breaks forth In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed By the imprisoning of unruly wind Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving, Shakes the old beldam earth and topples down Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth Our grandam earth, having this distemperature, In passion shook.
Cousin, of many men I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave To tell you once again that at my birth The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. These signs have marked me extraordinary, And all the courses of my life do show I am not in the roll of common men. Where is he living, clipped in with the sea That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales, Which calls me pupil or hath read to me? And bring him out that is but woman’s son Can trace me in the tedious ways of art And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there’s no man speaks better Welsh.I’ll to dinner.
Peace, cousin Percy. You will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, so can I, or so can any man,But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil. If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither, And I’ll be sworn I have power to shame him hence. O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye And sandy-bottomed Severn have I sent him Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Home without boots, and in foul weather too!How ’scapes he agues, in the devil’s name?
Come, here’s the map. Shall we divide our rightAccording to our threefold order ta'en?
The Archdeacon hath divided it Into three limits very equally: England, from Trent and Severn hitherto, By south and east is to my part assigned; All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore, And all the fertile land within that bound To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you The remnant northward, lying off from Trent. And our indentures tripartite are drawn, Which being sealèd interchangeably— A business that this night may execute— Tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth To meet your father and the Scottish power, As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury. My father Glendower is not ready yet, Not shall we need his help these fourteen days. (to GLENDOWER ) Within that space you may have drawn together Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords, And in my conduct shall your ladies come, From whom you now must steal and take no leave, For there will be a world of water shed Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here, In quantity equals not one of yours. See how this river comes me cranking in And cuts me from the best of all my land A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out. I’ll have the current in this place dammed up, And here the smug and silver Trent shall run In a new channel, fair and evenly. It shall not wind with such a deep indent, To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not wind? It shall, it must. You see it doth.
Yea, but Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up With like advantage on the other side, Gelding the opposèd continent as much As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him hereAnd on this north side win this cape of land,And then he runs straight and even.
I’ll have it so. A little charge will do it.
I’ll not have it altered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.
Who shall say me nay?
Why, that will I.
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I can speak English, lord, as well as you, For I was trained up in the English court, Where being but young I framèd to the harp Many an English ditty lovely well And gave the tongue a helpful ornament— A virtue that was never seen in you.
Marry, And I am glad of it with all my heart: I had rather be a kitten and cry “mew” Than one of these same meter balladmongers. I had rather hear a brazen can’stick turned, Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree, And that would set my teeth nothing an edge, Nothing so much as mincing poetry. 'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Come, you shall have Trent turned.
I do not care. I’ll give thrice so much land To any well-deserving friend; But in the way of bargain, mark you me, I’ll cavil on the ninth part of a hair. Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair. You may away by night. I’ll haste the writer, and withal Break with your wives of your departure hence. I am afraid my daughter will run mad, So much she doteth on her Mortimer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, cousin Percy, how you cross my father!
I cannot choose. Sometime he angers me With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant, Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies, And of a dragon and a finless fish, A clip-winged griffin and a moulten raven, A couching lion and a ramping cat, And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff As puts me from my faith. I tell you what— He held me last night at least nine hours In reckoning up the several devils' names That were his lackeys. I cried “Hum,” and “Well, go to,” But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious As a tired horse, a railing wife, Worse than a smoky house: I had rather live With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far, Than feed on cates and have him talk to me In any summerhouse in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman, Exceedingly well read and profited In strange concealments, valiant as a lion, And as wondrous affable, and as bountiful As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin? He holds your temper in a high respect And curbs himself even of his natural scope When you come cross his humor. Faith, he does. I warrant you that man is not alive Might so have tempted him as you have done Without the taste of danger and reproof. But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
(to HOTSPUR ) In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame, And, since your coming hither, have done enough To put him quite beside his patience. You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault. Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood— And that’s the dearest grace it renders you— Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage, Defect of manners, want of government, Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain, The least of which, haunting a nobleman, Loseth men’s hearts and leaves behind a stain Upon the beauty of all parts besides, Beguiling them of commendation.
Well, I am schooled. Good manners be your speed!Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is the deadly spite that angers me:My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps; she’ll not part with you.She’ll be a soldier too, she’ll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt PercyShall follow in your conduct speedily.
She is desperate here, a peevish self-willed harlotry,One that no persuasion can do good upon.
I understand thy looks. That pretty Welsh Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens I am too perfect in, and but for shame In such a parley should I answer thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I understand thy kisses and thou mine, And that’s a feeling disputation; But I will never be a truant, love, Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned, Sung by a fair queen in a summer’s bower, With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down And rest your gentle head upon her lap, And she will sing the song that pleaseth you And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep, Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness, Making such difference ’twixt wake and sleep As is the difference betwixt day and night The hour before the heavenly harnessed team Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I’ll sit and hear her sing.By that time will our book, I think, be drawn
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do so; And those musicians that shall play to you Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence, And straight they shall be here. Sit, and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Go, you giddy goose.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,And ’tis no marvel he is so humorous.By 'r Lady, he is a good musician.
Then should you be nothing but musical, for you are altogether governed by humors. Lie still, you thief, andhear the lady sing in Welsh.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
No.
Then be still.
Neither;’tis a woman’s fault.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now God help thee!
To the Welsh lady’s bed.
What’s that?
Peace, she sings.
Come, Kate, I’ll have your song too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not mine, in good sooth.
Not yours, in good sooth! Heart, you swear like a comfit-maker’s wife! “Not you, in good sooth,” and “as true as I live,” and “as God shall mend me,” and “as sure as day”— And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths As if thou never walk’st further than Finsbury. Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art, A good mouth-filling oath, and leave “in sooth,” And such protest of pepper-gingerbread, To velvet-guards and Sunday citizens. Come, sing.
I will not sing.
'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast teacher. An the indentures be drawn, I’ll away within these two hours, and so come in when ye will.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer; you are as slow As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go. By this our book is drawn. We’ll but seal, And then to horse immediately.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart.
Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I Must have some private conference, but be near at hand, For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether God will have it so For some displeasing service I have done, That, in his secret doom, out of my blood He’ll breed revengement and a scourge for me. But thou dost in thy passages of life Make me believe that thou art only marked For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, Could such inordinate and low desires, Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts, Such barren pleasures, rude society As thou art matched withal, and grafted to, Accompany the greatness of thy blood, And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could Quit all offenses with as clear excuse As well as I am doubtless I can purge Myself of many I am charged withal. Yet such extenuation let me beg As, in reproof of many tales devised, Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear, By smiling pickthanks and base newsmongers, I may for some things true, wherein my youth Hath faulty wandered and irregular, Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee. Yet let me wonder, Harry, At thy affections, which do hold a wing Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors. Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost, Which by thy younger brother is supplied, And art almost an alien to the hearts Of all the court and princes of my blood. The hope and expectation of thy time Is ruined, and the soul of every man Prophetically doth forethink thy fall. Had I so lavish of my presence been, So common-hackneyed in the eyes of men, So stale and cheap to vulgar company, Opinion, that did help me to the crown, Had still kept loyal to possession And left me in reputeless banishment, A fellow of no mark nor likelihood. By being seldom seen, I could not stir But like a comet I was wondered at; That men would tell their children “This is he.” Others would say “Where? Which is Bolingbroke?” And then I stole all courtesy from heaven, And dressed myself in such humility That I did pluck allegiance from men’s hearts, Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths, Even in the presence of the crownèd King. Thus did I keep my person fresh and new, My presence, like a robe pontifical, Ne'er seen but wondered at, and so my state, Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast And won by rareness such solemnity. The skipping King, he ambled up and down With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits, Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state, Mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools, Had his great name profanèd with their scorns, And gave his countenance, against his name, To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push Of every beardless vain comparative; Grew a companion to the common streets, Enfeoffed himself to popularity, That, being daily swallowed by men’s eyes, They surfeited with honey and began To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little More than a little is by much too much. So, when he had occasion to be seen, He was but as the cuckoo is in June, Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes As, sick and blunted with community, Afford no extraordinary gaze Such as is bent on sunlike majesty When it shines seldom in admiring eyes, But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down, Slept in his face, and rendered such aspect As cloudy men use to their adversaries, Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full. And in that very line, Harry, standest thou, For thou has lost thy princely privilege With vile participation. Not an eye But is aweary of thy common sight, Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more, Which now doth that I would not have it do, Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,Be more myself.
For all the world As thou art to this hour was Richard then When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh, And even as I was then is Percy now. Now, by my scepter, and my soul to boot, He hath more worthy interest to the state Than thou, the shadow of succession. For of no right, nor color like to right, He doth fill fields with harness in the realm, Turns head against the lion’s armèd jaws, And, being no more in debt to years than thou, Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on To bloody battles and to bruising arms. What never-dying honor hath he got Against renownèd Douglas, whose high deeds, Whose hot incursions and great name in arms, Holds from all soldiers chief majority And military title capital Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ. Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes, This infant warrior, in his enterprises Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once, Enlargèd him, and made a friend of him, To fill the mouth of deep defiance up And shake the peace and safety of our throne. And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland, The Archbishop’s Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer, Capitulate against us and are up. But wherefore do I tell these news to thee? Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes, Which art my nearest and dearest enemy? Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, Base inclination, and the start of spleen, To fight against me under Percy’s pay, To dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns, To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so. You shall not find it so. And God forgive them that so much have swayed Your Majesty’s good thoughts away from me. I will redeem all this on Percy’s head, And, in the closing of some glorious day, Be bold to tell you that I am your son, When I will wear a garment all of blood And stain my favors in a bloody mask, Which, washed away, shall scour my shame with it. And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights, That this same child of honor and renown, This gallant Hotspur, this all-praisèd knight, And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet. For every honor sitting on his helm, Would they were multitudes, and on my head My shames redoubled! For the time will come That I shall make this northern youth exchange His glorious deeds for my indignities. Percy is but my factor, good my lord, To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf. And I will call him to so strict account That he shall render every glory up, Yea, even the slightest worship of his time, Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart. This in the name of God I promise here, The which if He be pleased I shall perform, I do beseech your Majesty may salve The long-grown wounds of my intemperance. If not, the end of life cancels all bands, And I will die a hundred thousand deaths Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this.Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now, good Blunt? Thy looks are full of speed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So hath the business that I come to speak of. Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word That Douglas and the English rebels met The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury. A mighty and a fearful head they are, If promises be kept on every hand, As ever offered foul play in the state.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth today, With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster, For this advertisement is five days old.— On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward. On Thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting Is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you shall march Through Gloucestershire; by which account, Our business valuèd, some twelve days hence Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet. Our hands are full of business. Let’s away. Advantage feeds him fat while men delay.
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last action? Do I not bate? Do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs about me like an like an old lady’s loose gown. I am withered like an old applejohn. Well, I’ll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some liking. I shall beout of heart shortly, and then I shall have no strengthto repent. An I have not forgotten what the inside of achurch is made of, I am a peppercorn, a brewer’s horse.The inside of a church! Company, villanous company, hath been the spoil of me.
Sir John, you are so fretful you cannot live long.
Why, there is it. Come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous enough: swore little; diced not above seventimes— a week; went to a bawdy house once in a quarter—of an hour; paid money that I borrowed, three orfour times; lived well and in good compass; and now I live out of all order, out of all compass.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out of all compass, out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.
Do thou amend thy face, and I’ll amend my life. Thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but ’tis in the nose of thee. Thou art the knight of theburning lamp.
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
No, I’ll be sworn, I make as good use of it as many a man doth of a death’s-head or a memento mori . I never see thy face but I think upon hellfire and Dives that lived in purple, for there he is in his robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way given to virtue, I would swear by thy face. My oath should be “By this fire, that’s God’s angel.” But thou art altogether given over,and wert indeed, but for the light in thy face, the sonof utter darkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in thenight to catch my horse, if I did not think thou hadst been an ignis fatuus , or a ball of wildfire, there’s no purchase in money. O, thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light! Thou hast saved me a thousandmarks in links and torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt tavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap at the dearest chandler’s in Europe. I have maintained that salamander of yours with fire any time this two andthirty years, God reward me for it.
'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Godamercy, so should I be sure to be heart-burned!
How now, Dame Partlet the hen, have you enquired yet who picked my pocket?
Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John, do you think I keep thieves in my house? I have searched, I have enquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant. The tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.
You lie, hostess. Bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair; and I’ll be sworn my pocket was picked. Go to, youare a woman, go.
Who, I? No; I defy thee! God’s light, I was never called so in mine own house before.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, I know you well enough.
No, Sir John, you do not know me, Sir John. I know you,Sir John. You owe me money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it. I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas. I have given them away to bakers' wives; they have made bolters of them.
Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight shillings an ell. You owe money here besides, Sir John, for your diet and by- drinkings, and money lent you, four and twenty pound.
[points at BARDOLPH ] He had his part of it. Let him pay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He? Alas, he is poor. He hath nothing.
How, poor? Look upon his face. What call you rich? Let them coin his nose. Let them coin his cheeks. I’ll not pay a denier. What, will you make a younker of me? ShallI not take mine case in mine inn but I shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a seal ring of my grandfather’s worth forty mark.
O Jesu, I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how oft, that that ring was copper!
How? The Prince is a jack, a sneak-up. 'Sblood, an he were here, I would cudgel him like a dog if he would sayso.
How now, lad, is the wind in that door, i' faith? Must we all march?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
My lord, I pray you, hear me.
What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy husband? I love him well; he is an honest man.
Good my lord, hear me.
Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say’st thou, Jack?
The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras, and had my pocket picked. This house is turned bawdy house; they pick pockets.
What didst thou lose, Jack?
Wilt thou believe me, Hal, three or four bonds of fortypound apiece, and a seal ring of my grandfather’s.
A trifle, some eightpenny matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard your Grace say so. And, my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, likea foul-mouthed man as he is; and said he would cudgel you.
What, he did not!
There’s neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
There’s no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no more truth in thee than in a drawn fox, and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be the deputy’s wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing, go.
Say, what thing, what thing?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What thing! Why, a thing to thank God on.
I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou shouldst know it! I am an honest man’s wife, and, setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me so.
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
What beast? Why, an otter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An otter, Sir John. Why an otter?
Why, she’s neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to have her.
Thou art an unjust man in saying so. Thou or any man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou.
Thou sayest true, hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.
So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you owed him a thousand pound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?
A thousand pound, Hal? A million. Thy love is worth a million; thou owest me thy love.
Nay, my lord, he called you “jack,” and said he would cudgel you.
Did I, Bardolph?
Indeed, Sir John, you said so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
I say ’tis copper. Darest thou be as good as thy word now?
Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare, but as thou art Prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of a lion’s whelp.
And why not as the lion?
The King is to be feared as the lion. Dost thou think I’ll fear thee as I fear thy father? Nay, an I do, I pray God my girdle break.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees! But, sirrah, there’s no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine. It is all filled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket? Why, thou whoreson, impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything in thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of bawdy houses, and one poor pennyworth, of sugar candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but these, I am a villain. And, yet you will stand to it! You will not pocket up wrong! Art thou not ashamed?
Dost thou hear, Hal? Thou knowest in the state of innocency Adam fell, and what should poor Jack Falstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest I have more flesh than another man and therefore more frailty. You confess, then, you picked my pocket?
It appears so by the story.
Hostess, I forgive thee. Go make ready breakfast, love thy, husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy guests. Thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason. Thou seest I am pacified still. Nay, prithee, be gone.
Now, Hal, to the news at court. For the robbery, lad, how is that answered?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee. The money is paid back again.
O, I do not like that paying back. 'Tis a double labor.
I am good friends with my father and may do anything.
Rob me the Exchequer the first thing thou dost, and do it with unwashed hands too.
Do, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find one that can steal well? O, for a fine thief of the age of two and twenty or thereabouts! I am heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these rebels. They offend none but the virtuous. I laud them; I praise them.
Bardolph!
My lord.
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,To my brother John; this to my Lord of Westmoreland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple hall At two o'clock in the afternoon; There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive Money and order for their furniture. The land is burning. Percy stands on high, And either we or they must lower lie.
Rare words, brave world!—Hostess, my breakfast, come.—O, I could wish this tavern were my drum.
Well said, my noble Scot. If speaking truth In this fine age were not thought flattery, Such attribution should the Douglas have As not a soldier of this season’s stamp Should go so general current through the world. By God, I cannot flatter. I do defy The tongues of soothers. But a braver place In my heart’s love hath no man than yourself. Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
Thou art the king of honor.No man so potent breathes upon the groundBut I will beard him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do so, and ’tis well.
What letters hast thou there? [To DOUGLAS] I can but thank you.
These letters come from your father.
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord. He is grievous sick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sickIn such a justling time? Who leads his power?Under whose government come they along?
His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,And, at the time of my departure thence,He was much feared by his physicians.
I would the state of time had first been wholeEre he by sickness had been visited.His health was never better worth than now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sick now? Droop now? This sickness doth infect The very lifeblood of our enterprise. 'Tis catching hither, even to our camp. He writes me here that inward sickness— And that his friends by deputation Could not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet To lay so dangerous and dear a trust On any soul removed but on his own; Yet doth he give us bold advertisement That with our small conjunction we should on To see how fortune is disposed to us, For, as he writes, there is no quailing now, Because the King is certainly possessed Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father’s sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopped off! And yet, in faith, it is not. His present want Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good To set the exact wealth of all our states All at one cast? To set so rich a main On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour? It were not good, for therein should we read The very bottom and the soul of hope, The very list, the very utmost bound Of all our fortunes.
Faith, and so we should, where now remains A sweet reversion. We may boldly spend Upon the hope of what is to come in. A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto,If that the devil and mischance look bigUpon the maidenhead of our affairs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But yet I would your father had been here. The quality and hair of our attempt Brooks no division. It will be thought By some that know not why he is away That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence. And think how such an apprehension May turn the tide of fearful faction And breed a kind of question in our cause. For well you know, we of the off'ring side Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament, And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence The eye of reason may pry in upon us. This absence of your father’s draws a curtain That shows the ignorant a kind of fear Before not dreamt of.
You strain too far. I rather of his absence make this use: It lends a luster and more great opinion, A larger dare, to our great enterprise Than if the Earl were here, for men must think If we without his help can make a head To push against a kingdom, with his help We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down. Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think. There is not such a wordSpoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No harm, what more?
And further I have learned,The King himself in person is set forth,Or hitherwards intended speedily,With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son, The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales, And his comrades, that daffed the world aside And bid it pass?
All furnished, all in arms, All plumed like ostriches that with the wind Baited like eagles having lately bathed, Glittering in golden coats like images, As full of spirit as the month of May, And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer, Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls. I saw young Harry with his beaver on, His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly armed Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury And vaulted with such ease into his seat As if an angel dropped down from the clouds, To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more! Worse than the sun in March This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come. They come like sacrifices in their trim, And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war All hot and bleeding will we offer them. The mailèd Mars shall on his altar sit Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse, Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales. Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse, Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corpse. O, that Glendower were come!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is more news.I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
That’s the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the King’s whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Forty let it be. My father and Glendower being both away, The powers of us may serve so great a day. Come, let us take a muster speedily. Doomsday is near. Die all, die merrily.
Talk not of dying. I am out of fearOf death or death’s hand for this one half year.
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry. Fill me a bottleof sack. Our soldiers shall march through. We’ll to Sutton Coldfield tonight.
Will you give me money, captain?
Lay out, lay out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This bottle makes an angel.
An if it do, take it for thy labor. An if it make twenty, take them all. I’ll answer the coinage. Bid my lieutenant Peto meet me at town’s end.
I will, captain. Farewell.
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet. I have misused the King’s press damnably. I havegot, in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers, threehundred and odd pounds. I press me none but good householders, yeomen’s sons; inquire me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked twice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves—as had as lief hear the devil as a drum, such as fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck. I pressed me none but such toasts-and-butter, with hearts in theirbellies no bigger than pins' heads, and they have bought out their services, and now my whole charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of companies— slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth, where the glutton’s dogs licked his sores; and such as indeed were never soldiers, but discarded, unjust servingmen, younger sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and ostlers tradefallen, the cankers of a calm world and a long peace, ten times more dishonorable-ragged than an old feazed ancient; and suchhave I to fill up the rooms of them that have bought out their services, that you would think that I had a hundred and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad fellowmet me on the way and told me I had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye hath seen such scarecrows. I’ll not march through Coventry with them, that’s flat. Nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs as if they had gyves on, for indeed I had the most of them out of prison. There’s not a shirt and a half in all my company, and the half shirt is two napkins tacked together and thrown over the shoulders like a herald’s coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Albans or the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that’s all one; they’ll find linen enough on every hedge.
How now, blown Jack? How now, quilt?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, Hal, how now, mad wag? What a devil dost thou in Warwickshire?—My good Lord of Westmoreland, I cry you mercy: I thought your Honor had already been at Shrewsbury.
Faith, Sir John, ’tis more than time that I were there and you too, but my powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us all. We must away all night.
Tut, never fear me. I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.
I think to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after?
Mine, Hal, mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder. They’ll fill a pit as well as better. Tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor andbare, too beggarly.
Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that, and for their bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me.
No, I’ll be sworn, unless you call three fingers in theribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste. Percy is already inthe field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, is the King encamped?
He is, Sir John. I fear we shall stay too long.
Well,To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feastFits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
We’ll fight with him tonight.
It may not be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You give him then advantage.
Not a whit.
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
So do we.
His is certain; ours is doubtful.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good cousin, be advised. Stir not tonight.
[To HOTSPUR] Do not, my lord.
You do not counsel well.You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life (And I dare well maintain it with my life), If well-respected honor bid me on, I hold as little counsel with weak fear As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives. Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle Which of us fears.
Yea, or tonight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Content.
Tonight, say I.
Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much, Being men of such great leading as you are, That you foresee not what impediments Drag back our expedition. Certain horse Of my cousin Vernon’s are not yet come up. Your Uncle Worcester’s horse came but today, And now their pride and mettle is asleep, Their courage with hard labor tame and dull, That not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemyIn general journey-bated and brought low.The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceedeth ours.For God’s sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I come with gracious offers from the King,If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God You were of our determination. Some of us love you well, and even those some Envy your great deservings and good name Because you are not of our quality But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so, So long as out of limit and true rule You stand against anointed majesty. But to my charge. The king hath sent to know The nature of your griefs, and whereupon You conjure from the breast of civil peace Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land Audacious cruelty. If that the king Have any way your good deserts forgot, Which he confesseth to be manifold, He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed You shall have your desires with interest And pardon absolute for yourself and these Herein misled by your suggestion.
The King is kind, and well we know the king Knows at what time to promise, when to pay. My father and my uncle and myself Did give him that same royalty he wears, And when he was not six-and-twenty strong, Sick in the world’s regard, wretched and low, A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home, My father gave him welcome to the shore; And when he heard him swear and vow to God He came but to be Duke of Lancaster, To sue his livery, and beg his peace, With tears of innocency and terms of zeal, My father, in kind heart and pity moved, Swore him assistance and performed it too. Now when the lords and barons of the realm Perceived Northumberland did lean to him, The more and less came in with cap and knee, Met him in boroughs, cities, villages, Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes, Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths, Gave him their heirs as pages, followed him Even at the heels in golden multitudes. He presently, as greatness knows itself, Steps me a little higher than his vow Made to my father while his blood was poor Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh, And now forsooth takes on him to reform Some certain edicts and some strait decrees That lie too heavy on the commonwealth, Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep Over his country’s wrongs, and by this face, This seeming brow of justice, did he win The hearts of all that he did angle for, Proceeded further—cut me off the heads Of all the favourites that the absent King In deputation left behind him here When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then to the point. In short time after, he deposed the King, Soon after that deprived him of his life And, in the neck of that, tasked the whole state. To make that worse, suffered his kinsman March (Who is, if every owner were well placed, Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales, There without ransom to lie forfeited, Disgraced me in my happy victories, Sought to entrap me by intelligence, Rated mine uncle from the council board, In rage dismissed my father from the court, Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong, And in conclusion drove us to seek out This head of safety, and withal to pry Into his title, the which we find Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the King?
Not so, Sir Walter. We’ll withdraw awhile. Go to the King, and let there be impawned Some surety for a safe return again, And in the morning early shall my uncle Bring him our purposes. And so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And maybe so we shall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray God you do.
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealèd brief With winged haste to the Lord Marshal, This to my cousin Scrope, and all the rest To whom they are directed. If you knew How much they do import, you would make haste.
My good lord, I guess their tenor.
Like enough you do. Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men Must bide the touch. For, sir, at Shrewsbury, As I am truly given to understand, The King with mighty and quick-raisèd power Meets with Lord Harry. And I fear, Sir Michael, What with the sickness of Northumberland, Whose power was in the first proportion, And what with Owen Glendower’s absence thence, Who with them was a rated sinew too And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies, I fear the power of Percy is too weak To wage an instant trial with the King.
Why, my good lord, you need not fear.There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, Mortimer is not there.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,And there is my Lord of Worcester and a headOf gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is. But yet the King hath drawn The special head of all the land together: The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt, And many more corrivals and dear men Of estimation and command in arms.
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less, yet needful ’tis to fear; And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed. For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King Dismiss his power, he means to visit us, For he hath heard of our confederacy, And ’tis but wisdom to make strong against him: Therefore make haste. I must go write again To other friends. And so farewell, Sir Michael.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How bloodily the sun begins to peerAbove yon busky hill. The day looks paleAt his distemp'rature.
The southern windDoth play the trumpet to his purposes,And by his hollow whistling in the leavesForetells a tempest and a blust'ring day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester? ' Tis not well That you and I should meet upon such terms As now we meet. You have deceived our trust And made us doff our easy robes of peace To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel. This is not well, my lord; this is not well. What say you to it? Will you again unknit This churlish knot of all-abhorrèd war And move in that obedient orb again Where you did give a fair and natural light, And be no more an exhaled meteor, A prodigy of fear and a portent Of broachèd mischief to the unborn times?
Hear me, my liege: For mine own part I could be well content To entertain the lag end of my life With quiet hours. For I do protest I have not sought the day of this dislike.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have not sought it? How comes it then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Peace, chewet, peace.
(to the KING ) It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks Of favour from myself and all our house; And yet I must remember you, my lord, We were the first and dearest of your friends. For you my staff of office did I break In Richard’s time, and posted day and night To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand When yet you were in place and in account Nothing so strong and fortunate as I. It was myself, my brother, and his son That brought you home and boldly did outdare The dangers of the time. You swore to us, And you did swear that oath at Doncaster, That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state, Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right, The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster. To this we swore our aid. But in short space It rained down fortune show'ring on your head, And such a flood of greatness fell on you— What with our help, what with the absent King, What with the injuries of a wanton time, The seeming sufferances that you had borne, And the contrarious winds that held the KingSo long in his unlucky Irish warsThat all in England did repute him dead— And from this swarm of fair advantages You took occasion to be quickly wooed To gripe the general sway into your hand, Forget your oath to us at Doncaster; And being fed by us, you used us so As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo’s bird, Useth the sparrow—did oppress our nest, Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk That even our love durst not come near your sight For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing We were enforced for safety sake to fly Out of sight and raise this present head, Whereby we stand opposèd by such means As you yourself have forged against yourself By unkind usage, dangerous countenance, And violation of all faith and troth Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate, Proclaimed at market crosses, read in churches, To face the garment of rebellion With some fine color that may please the eye Of fickle changelings and poor discontents, Which gape and rub the elbow at the news Of hurlyburly innovation. And never yet did insurrection want Such water colors to impaint his cause, Nor moody beggars starving for a time Of pellmell havoc and confusion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In both your armies there is many a soul Shall pay full dearly for this encounter If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew, The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes, This present enterprise set off his head, I do not think a braver gentleman, More active-valiant, or more valiant-young, More daring or more bold, is now alive To grace this latter age with noble deeds. For my part, I may speak it to my shame, I have a truant been to chivalry, And so I hear he doth account me too. Yet this before my father’s majesty: I am content that he shall take the odds Of his great name and estimation, And will, to save the blood on either side, Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee, Albeit considerations infinite Do make against it.— No, good Worcester, no, We love our people well, even those we love That are misled upon your cousin’s part. And, will they take the offer of our grace, Both he and they and you, yea, every man Shall be my friend again, and I’ll be his. So tell your cousin, and bring me word What he will do. But if he will not yield, Rebuke and dread correction wait on us, And they shall do their office. So begone. We will not now be troubled with reply. We offer fair. Take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life. The Douglas and the Hotspur both together Are confident against the world in arms.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,For on their answer will we set on them,And God befriend us as our cause is just.
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me,so;’tis a point of friendship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I would ’twere bedtime, Hal, and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
'Tis not due yet. I would be loath to pay Him before His day. What need I be so forward with Him that calls not on me? Well, ’tis no matter. Honour pricks me on. Yea, but how if honor prick me off when I come on? How then? Can honor set to a leg? no. Or an arm? no. Or takeaway the grief of a wound? No. Honor hath no skill in surgery, then? No. What is honor? A word. What is in that word “honor”? What is that “honor”? Air. A trim reckoning. Who hath it? He that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? No. Doth he hear it? No. 'Tis insensible, then? Yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? No. Why? Detraction will not suffer it. Therefore, I’ll none of it. Honor is a mere scutcheon. And so ends my catechism.
O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,The liberal and kind offer of the King.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Twere best he did.
Then are we all undone. It is not possible, it cannot be The King should keep his word in loving us. He will suspect us still and find a time To punish this offense in other faults. Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes, For treason is but trusted like the fox, Who, never so tame, so cherished and locked up, Will have a wild trick of his ancestors. Look how we can, or sad or merrily, Interpretation will misquote our looks, And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, The better cherished still the nearer death. My nephew’s trespass may be well forgot; It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, And an adopted name of privilege— A hairbrained Hotspur governed by a spleen: All his offenses live upon my head And on his father’s. We did train him on, And, his corruption being ta'en from us, We as the spring of all shall pay for all. Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know In any case the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will; I’ll say ’tis so.
Here comes your cousin.
My uncle is returned.Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.—Uncle, what news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The King will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the King.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did you beg any? God forbid!
I told him gently of our grievances, Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus By now forswearing that he is forsworn. He calls us “rebels,” “traitors,” and will scourge With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen; to arms. For I have thrown A brave defiance in King Henry’s teeth, And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it, Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads, And that no man might draw short breath today But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me, How showed his tasking? Seemed it in contempt?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by my soul. I never in my life Did hear a challenge urged more modestly, Unless a brother should a brother dare To gentle exercise and proof of arms. He gave you all the duties of a man, Trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue, Spoke your deservings like a chronicle, Making you ever better than his praise By still dispraising praise valued in you, And, which became him like a prince indeed, He made a blushing cital of himself, And chid his truant youth with such a grace As if he mastered there a double spirit Of teaching and of learning instantly. There did he pause: but let me tell the world: If he outlive the envy of this day, England did never owe so sweet a hope, So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamorèd On his follies. Never did I hear Of any Prince so wild a liberty. But be he as he will, yet once ere night I will embrace him with a soldier’s arm, That he shall shrink under my courtesy.— Arm, arm with speed, and, fellows, soldiers, friends, Better consider what you have to do Than I that have not well the gift of tongue Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
My lord, here are letters for you.
I cannot read them now.— O gentlemen, the time of life is short; To spend that shortness basely were too long If life did ride upon a dial’s point, Still ending at the arrival of an hour. An if we live, we live to tread on kings; If die, brave death, when princes die with us. Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair When the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare. The King comes on apace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank him that he cuts me from my tale, For I profess not talking. Only this: Let each man do his best. And here draw I a sword, Whose temper I intend to stain With the best blood that I can meet withal In the adventure of this perilous day. Now, Esperance! Percy! And set on. Sound all the lofty instruments of war, And by that music let us all embrace, For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name that in the battle thusThou crossest me? What honor dost thou seekUpon my head?
Know then, my name is Douglas,And I do haunt thee in the battle thusBecause some tell me that thou art a king.
They tell thee true.
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry, This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee, Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot,And thou shalt find a king that will revengeLord Stafford’s death.
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,I never had triumphed upon a Scot.
All’s done, all’s won; here breathless lies the King.
Where?
Here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.A gallant knight he was; his name was Blunt,Semblably furnished like the King himself.
[To BLUNT] A fool go with thy soul whither it goes!A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The King hath many marching in his coats.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats.I’ll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,Until I meet the King.
Up and away!Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Though I could ’scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here. Here’s no scoring but upon the pate.— Soft, who are you? Sir Walter Blunt. There’s honor for you. Here’s no vanity. I am as hot as molten lead, and as heavy too. God keep lead out of me; I need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered. There’s not three of my hundredand fifty left alive, and they are for the town’s end, to beg during life. But who comes here?
What, stand’st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword. Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies, Whose deaths are yet unrevenged. I prithee, Lend me thy sword.
O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile. TurkGregory never did such deeds in arms as I have done this day. I have paid Percy; I have made him sure.
He is indeed, and living to kill thee.I prithee, lend me thy sword.
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou gett’st not my sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give it to me. What, is it in the case?
Ay, Hal, ’tis hot, ’tis hot. There’s that will sack a city. [ PRINCEHENRY draws it out and finds it to be a bottle of sack]
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
Well, if Percy be alive, I’ll pierce him. If he do comein my way, so; if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I like not such grinning honor as Sir Walter hath. Give me life, which if I can save, so: if not, honor comes unlooked for, and there’s an end.
I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself. Thou bleedest too much.Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your Majesty, make up,Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
I will do so.—My Lord of Westmoreland,Lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I’ll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help, And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive The Prince of Wales from such a field as this, Where stained nobility lies trodden on, And rebels' arms triumph in massacres.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland,Our duty this way lies. For God’s sake, come.
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster. I did not think thee lord of such a spirit. Before, I loved thee as a brother, John, But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the pointWith lustier maintenance than I did look forOf such an ungrown warrior.
O, this boy lends mettle to us all.
Another king! they grow like Hydra’s heads.— I am the Douglas, fatal to all those That wear those colors on them. What art thou That counterfeit’st the person of a king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart, So many of his shadows thou hast met And not the very king. I have two boys Seek Percy and thyself about the field, But, seeing thou fall’st on me so luckily, I will assay thee. And defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit, And yet, in faith, thou bear’st thee like a king. But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be, And thus I win thee.
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like Never to hold it up again. The spirits Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms. It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee, Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly, my lord. How fares your Grace?Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,And so hath Clifton. I’ll to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breathe awhile. Thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion And showed thou mak’st some tender of my life In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God, they did me too much injury That ever said I hearkened for your death. If it were so, I might have let alone The insulting hand of Douglas over you, Which would have been as speedy in your end As all the poisonous potions in the world, And saved the treacherous labor of your son.
Make up to Clifton. I’ll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak’st as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then I see A very valiant rebel of the name. I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy, To share with me in glory any more. Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere, Nor can one England brook a double reign, Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is comeTo end the one of us, and would to GodThy name in arms were now as great as mine.
I’ll make it greater ere I part from thee,And all the budding honors on thy crestI’ll crop, to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
Well said, Hal! To it Hal! Nay, you shall find no boys'play here, I can tell you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth. I better brook the loss of brittle life Than those proud titles thou hast won of me. They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh. But thoughts, the slave of life, and life, time’s fool, And time, that takes survey of all the world, Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy, But that the earthy and cold hand of death Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust, And food for— (he dies)
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart. Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk! When that this body did contain a spirit, A kingdom for it was too small a bound, But now two paces of the vilest earth Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead Bears not alive so stout a gentleman. If thou wert sensible of courtesy, I should not make so dear a show of zeal. But let my favors hide thy mangled face; And even in thy behalf I’ll thank myself For doing these fair rites of tenderness. Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven. Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave, But not remembered in thy epitaph.
What, old acquaintance, could not all this flesh Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell. I could have better spared a better man. O, I should have a heavy miss of thee If I were much in love with vanity. Death hath not struck so fat a deer today, Though many dearer in this bloody fray. Emboweled will I see thee by and by; Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Emboweled? If thou embowel me today, I’ll give you leave to powder me and eat me too tomorrow. 'Sblood, ’twas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I lie. I am no counterfeit. To die is to be a counterfeit, for he isbut the counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of aman; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby livethis to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect imageof life indeed. The better part of valor is discretion,in the which better part I have saved my life. Zounds, I am afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead. How if he should counterfeit too and rise? By my faith, I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit. Therefore I’ll make him sure, yea, and I’ll swear I killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. Therefore, sirrah, (stabs the body) with a new wound in your thigh,come you along with me. (he takes up HOTSPUR on his back)
Come, brother John. Full bravely hast thou fleshedThy maiden sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But soft, whom have we here?Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did; I saw him dead, Breathless and bleeding on the ground.— Art thou alive? Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight? I prithee, speak. We will not trust our eyes Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem’st.
No, that’s certain. I am not a double man. But if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a jack. There is Percy. If your father will do me any honor, so; if not, let him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either earl orduke, I can assure you.
Why, Percy I killed myself, and saw thee dead.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying. I grant you, Iwas down and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant and fought a longhour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be believed, so; if not, let them that should reward valor bear the sin upontheir own heads. I’ll take it upon my death, I gave himthis wound in the thigh. If the man were alive and would deny it, zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.—Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back.For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,I’ll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.Come, brother, let us to the highest of the fieldTo see what friends are living, who are dead.
I’ll follow, as they say, for reward. He that rewards me, God reward him. If I do grow great, I’ll grow less, for I’ll purge and leave sack and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.— Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace, Pardon, and terms of love to all of you? And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary, Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman’s trust? Three knights upon our party slain today, A noble earl, and many a creature else Had been alive this hour, If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What I have done my safety urged me to.And I embrace this fortune patiently,Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too.Other offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw The fortune of the day quite turned from him, The noble Percy slain, and all his men Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest, And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised That the pursuers took him. At my tent The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace I may dispose of him.
With all my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you This honorable bounty shall belong. Go to the Douglas, and deliver him Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free. His valor shown upon our crests today Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds, Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power. You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland, Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop, Who, as we hear, are busily in arms. Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March. Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway, Meeting the check of such another day. And since this business so fair is done, Let us not leave till all our own be won.
Open your ears, for which of you will stop The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks? I, from the orient to the drooping west, Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold The acts commenced on this ball of earth. Upon mytongues continual slanders ride, The which in every language I pronounce, Stuffing the ears of men with false reports. I speak of peace while covert enmity Under the smile of safety wounds the world. And who but Rumor, who but only I, Make fearful musters and prepareddefense, Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief, Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war, And no such matter? Rumor is a pipe Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures, And of so easy and so plain a stop That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, The still-discordant wav'ring multitude, Can play upon it. But what need I thus My well-known body to anatomize Among my household? Why is Rumor here? I run before King Harry’s victory, Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops, Quenching the flame of bold rebellion Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I To speak so true at first? My office is To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell Under the wrath of noble Hotspur’s sword, And that the King beforethe Douglas' rage Stooped his anointed head as low as death. This have I rumored through the peasant towns Between that royal field of Shrewsbury And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone, Where Hotspur’s father,old Northumberland, Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on, And not a man of them brings other news Than they have learnt of me. From Rumor’s tongues They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.
Who keeps the gate here, ho?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is the Earl?
What shall I say you are?
Tell thou the Earl That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
His lordship is walked forth into the orchard. Please it your Honor knock but at the gate And he himself will answer.
Here comes the Earl.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now Should be the father of some stratagem. The times are wild. Contention, like a horse Full of high feeding, madly hathbroke loose And bears down all before him.
Noble Earl, I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
Good, an God will!
As good as heart can wish. The King is almost wounded to the death, And, in the fortune of my lord your son, Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts Killed by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field; And Harry Monmouth’s brawn, the hulk Sir John, Is prisoner to yourson. O, such a day, So fought, so followed, and so fairly won, Came not till now to dignify the times SinceCaesar’s fortunes.
How is this derived? Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence, A gentleman well bred and of good name, That freely rendered me these news for true.
Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent On Tuesday last to listen after news.
My lord, I overrode him on the way; And he is furnishedwith no certainties More than he haply may retail from me.
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turned me back With joyful tidings and, being better horsed, Outrode me. After him came spurring hard A gentleman, almost forspent with speed, That stopp’d by me to breathe his bloodied horse. He asked the way to Chester, and of him I did demand what news from Shrewsbury. He told me that rebellion hadbad luck And that young Harry Percy’s spur was cold. With that he gave his able horse the head And, bending forward, struck his armèd heels Against the panting sides of his poor jade Up to the rowel-head, and starting so He seemed in running to devour the way, Staying no longer question.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha? Again: Said he young Harry Percy’s spur was cold? Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion Had met ill luck?
My lord, I’ll tell you what: If my young lord your son have not the day, Upon mine honor, for a silken point I’ll give my barony. Never talk of it.
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers Give then such instances of loss?
Who, he? He was some hilding fellow that had stolen The horse he rode on and, upon my life, Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news.
Yea, this man’s brow, like to a title leaf, Foretells the nature of a tragic volume. So looks the strond whereon the imperious flood Hath left a witness’d usurpation. — Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord, Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask To fright our party.
How doth my son and brother? Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless, Sodull, so dead in look, so woebegone, Drew Priam’s curtain in the dead of night, And would have told him half his Troy was burnt; But Priam found the fire ere hehis tongue, And I my Percy’s death ere thou report’st it. This thou wouldst say, “Your son did thus and thus; Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas”— Stoppingmy greedy ear with their bold deeds. But in the end, tostop my ear indeed, Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise, Ending with “Brother, son, and all are dead.”
Douglas is living, and your brother yet, But for my lord your son—
Why, he is dead. See what a ready tongue suspicion hath! He that but fears the thing he would not know Hath, by instinct, knowledge from others' eyes That what he feared is chancèd . Yet speak, Morton. Tell thou an earl his divination lies, And I will take it as a sweet disgrace And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid, Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet, for all this, say not that Percy’s dead. I see a strange confession in thine eye. Thou shak’st thy head and hold’st it fear or sin To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so. The tongue offends not that reports his death; And he doth sin that doth belie the dead, Not he which says the dead is not alive. Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news Hath but a losing office, and his tongue Sounds ever after as a sullen bell Remembered tolling a departing friend.
I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.
I am sorry I should force you to believe That which I would to God I had not seen, But these mine eyes saw himin bloody state, Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied andoutbreathed, To Harry Monmouth; whose swift wrath beat down The never-daunted Percy to the earth, From whence with life he never more sprung up. In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire Even to the dullest peasant in his camp, Being bruited once, took fire and heat away From the best tempered courage in his troops; For from his metal was his party steeled, Which, once in him abated, all the rest Turned on themselves, like dull andheavy lead. And as the thing that’s heavy in itself Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed, So did our men, heavy in Hotspur’s loss, Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety, Fly from the field. Then was the noble Worcester Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot, The bloody Douglas, whose well-laboring sword Had three times slain th'appearance of the King, Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame Of those that turned their backs and in his flight, Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all Is that the King hath won and hath sent out A speedy power to encounter you, my lord, Underthe conduct of young Lancaster And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.
For this I shall have time enough to mourn. In poison there is physic, and these news, Having been well, that would have made me sick, Being sick, have in some measure made me well. And as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints, Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life, Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire Outof his keeper’s arms, even so my limbs, Weakened with grief, being now enraged with grief, Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou nice crutch. A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly coif. Thou art a guard too wantonfor the head Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit. Now bind my brows with iron, and approach The ragged’st hour that time and spite dare bring To frown upon th'enraged Northumberland. Let heaven kiss earth! Now let not Nature’s hand Keep the wild flood confined. Let order die, And let this world no longer be a stage To feed contention in a lingering act; But let one spiritof the firstborn Cain Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set On bloody courses, the rude scene may end, And darkness be the burier of the dead.
This strainèd passion doth you wrong, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor. The lives of all your loving complices Lean on your health, the which, if you give o'er To stormy passion, must perforce decay. You cast th' event of war, my noble lord, And summed the account of chance before you said “Let us make head.” It was your presurmise That, in the dole of blows your son might drop. You knew he walked o'er perils on an edge, More likely to fall in than to get o'er. You were advised his flesh was capable Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit Would lifthim where most trade of danger ranged. Yet did you say “Go forth,” and none of this, Though strongly apprehended, could restrain The stiff-borne action. Whathath then befall'n, Or what did this bold enterprise brought forth, More than that being which was like to be?
We all that are engagèd to this loss Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas That if we wrought out life, ’twas ten to one; And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed Choked the respect of likely peril feared; And since we are o'erset, venture again. Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.
'Tis more than time.—And, my most noble lord, I hear for certain, and do speak the truth: The gentle Archbishop of York is up With well-appointed powers. He is a man Who with a double surety binds his followers. My lord your son had only but the corpse, But shadows andthe shows of men, to fight; For that same word “rebellion” did divide The action of their bodies from their souls, And they did fight with queasiness, constrained, As men drink potions, that their weapons only Seemed on our side. But, for their spirits and souls, This word “rebellion,” it had froze them up As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop Turns insurrection to religion. Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts, He’s followed both with body and with mind, And doth enlarge his rising with the blood Of fairKing Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones; Derives fromheaven his quarrel and his cause; Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land, Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke; And more and less do flock to follow him.
I knew of this before, but, to speak truth, This present grief had wiped it from my mind. Go in with me and counsel every man The aptest way for safety and revenge. Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed. Never so few, and never yet more need.
Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water, but, for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than he knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. The brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything that tends to laughter more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed all her litter but one. If the Prince put thee into my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I have no judgment. Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your master for a jewel. The juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not yet fledge—I will sooner have a beard grow in thepalm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek, and yet he will not stick to say his face is a face royal. God may finish it when He will. 'Tis not a hair amiss yet. He may keep it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet he’ll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but he’s almost out of mine, I can assure him. What said Master Dommelton about the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
He said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than Bardolph. He would not take his band and yours. He liked not the security.
Let him be damned like the glutton! Pray God his tonguebe hotter! A whoreson Achitophel, a rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman in hand and thenstand upon security! The whoreson smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes and bunches of keys at theirgirdles; and if a man is through with them in honest taking up, then they must stand upon security. I had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with “security.” I looked he should have sent metwo-and-twenty yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and he sends me “security.” Well, he may sleep in security, for he hath the horn of abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it, and yet cannot he see though he have his own lantern to light him. Where’s Bardolph?
He’s gone into Smithfield to buy your Worship a horse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I bought him in Paul’s, and he’ll buy me a horse in Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in the stews, I were manned, horsed, and wived.
Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him about Bardolph.
Wait close. I will not see him.
What’s he that goes there?
Falstaff, an ’t please your Lordship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He that was in question for the robbery?
He, my lord; but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going with some charge to the Lord John of Lancaster.
What, to York? Call him back again.
Sir John Falstaff!
Boy, tell him I am deaf.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You must speak louder. My master is deaf.
I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good.—Go pluck him by the elbow. I must speak with him.
Sir John!
What, a young knave and begging? Is there not wars? Is there not employment? Doth not the King lack subjects? Donot the rebels need soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg than tobe on the worst side, were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.
You mistake me, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why sir, did I say you were an honest man? Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so.
I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and our soldiership aside, and give me leave to tell you, you lie in your throat if you say I am any other than an honest man.
I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that whichgrows to me? If thou gett’st any leave of me, hang me; if thou tak’st leave, thou wert better be hanged. You hunt counter. Hence! Avaunt!
Sir, my lord would speak with you.
Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My good lord. God give your Lordship good time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship abroad. I heard say your Lordship was sick: I hope your Lordship goes abroadby advice. Your Lordship, though not clean past your youth, have yet some smack of an age in you, some relishof the saltness of time in you, and I most humbly beseech your Lordship to have a reverent care of your health.
Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to Shrewsbury.
An ’t please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty is returned with some discomfort from Wales.
I talk not of his Majesty. You would not come when I sent for you.
And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fallen into this same whoreson apoplexy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, God mend him. I pray you let me speak with you.
This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of lethargy , an ’t please your Lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling.
What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.
It hath its original from much grief, from study, and perturbation of the brain. I have read the cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of deafness.
I think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear not what I say to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very well, my lord, very well. Rather, an ’t please you, it is the disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that I am troubled withal.
To punish you by the heels would amend the attention ofyour ears, and I care not if I do become your physician.
I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient. Your Lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me inrespect of poverty, but how should I be your patient tofollow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself.
I sent for you, when there were matters against you foryour life, to come speak with me.
As I was then advised by my learned counsel in the lawsof this land-service, I did not come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great infamy.
He that buckles him in my belt cannot live in less.
Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.
I would it were otherwise. I would my means were greater and my waist slender.
You have misled the youthful Prince.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The young Prince hath misled me. I am the fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.
Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed wound. Your day’s service at Shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your night’s exploit on Gad’s Hill. You may thank th' unquiettime for your quiet o'erposting that action.
My lord!
But since all is well, keep it so. Wake not a sleeping wolf.
To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, you are as a candle, the better part burnt out.
A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. If I did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.
There is not a white hair on your face but should have his effect of gravity.
His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.
You follow the young Prince up and down like his ill angel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so, my lord. Your ill angel is light, but I hope hethat looks upon me will take me without weighing. And yet in some respects I grant I cannot go. I cannot tell.Virtue is of so little regard in these costermongers' times that true valor is turned bear-herd; pregnancy is made a tapster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. All the other gifts appurtenant to man, as the malice of this age shapes them, are not worth a gooseberry. You that are old consider not the capacitiesof us that are young. You do measure the heat of our livers with the bitterness of your galls , and we that are in the vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wagstoo.
Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down old with all the characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, and every part about you blasted with antiquity? And will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John
My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it with halloing and singing of anthems. To approve my youth further, I will not. The truth is, I am only old in judgment and understanding. And he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him! For the box of the ear that the Prince gave you, hegave it like a rude prince, and you took it like a sensible lord. I have checked him for it, and the young lion repents. Marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.
Well, God send the Prince a better companion.
God send the companion a better prince. I cannot rid myhands of him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, the King hath severed you and Prince Harry. I hear you are going with Lord John of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of Northumberland.
Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But look youpray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at home, that ourarmies join not in a hot day, for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I might never spit white again. There is not a dangerous action can peep out his head but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever. But it was always yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a good thing, to make it too common. If ye will needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest.I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to death witha rust than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion.
Well, be honest, be honest; and God bless your expedition!
Will your Lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?
Not a penny, not a penny. You are too impatient to bearcrosses. Fare you well. Commend me to my cousin Westmoreland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A man can no more separate age and covetousness than he can part young limbs and lechery; but the gout galls the one, andthe pox pinches the other, and so both the degrees prevent my curses. —Boy!
Sir.
What money is in my purse?
Seven groats and two pence.
I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse. Borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear this letter to my Lordof Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of Westmoreland; and this to old Mistress Ursula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceived the first white hair on my chin . About it. You know where to find me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A pox of this gout! Or, a gout of this pox, for the oneor the other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'Tis nomatter if I do halt. I have the wars for my color, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will make use of anything. I will turn diseases to commodity.
Thus have you heard our cause and known our means, And,my most noble friends, I pray you all Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes. And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our arms, But gladly wouldbe better satisfied How in our means we should advance ourselves To look with forehead bold and big enough Uponthe power and puissance of the King.
Our present musters grow upon the file To five-and-twenty thousand men of choice, And our supplieslive largely in the hope Of great Northumberland, whosebosom burns With an incensèd fire of injuries.
The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus: Whether our present five-and-twenty thousand May hold up head without Northumberland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With him we may.
Yea, marry, there’s the point. But if without him webe thought too feeble, My judgment is we should not step too far Till we had his assistance by the hand. Forin a theme so bloody-faced as this, Conjecture, expectation, and surmise Of aids incertain should not beadmitted.
'Tis very true, Lord Bardolph; for indeed It was young Hotspur’s cause at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope, Eating the air on promise of supply, Flatt'ring himself in project of a power Much smaller than the smallest of histhoughts, And so, with great imagination Proper to madmen, led his powers to death And, winking, leapt intodestruction.
But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, if this present quality of war— Indeed the instantaction, a cause on foot— Lives so in hope, as in an early spring We see the appearing buds, which to prove fruit Hope gives not so much warrant as despair That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build, We first survey the plot, then draw the model, And when we see the figure of the house, Then must we rate the cost of the erection, Which if we find outweighs ability, What do we then but draw anew the model In fewer offices, or at last desist To build at all? Much more in this great work, Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down And set another up, should we survey The plot of situation and the model, Consent upon a sure foundation, Question surveyors, know our own estate, How able such a work to undergo, To weigh against his opposite. Or else We fortify in paper and in figures, Using the names of men instead of men, Like one that draws the model of a house Beyond his power to build it , who, half through, Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost A naked subject tothe weeping clouds And waste for churlish winter’s tyranny.
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth, Should be stillborn and that we now possessed The utmost man ofexpectation, I think we are a body strong enough, Even as we are, to equal with the King.
What, is the King but five-and twenty-thousand?
To us no more, nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph, For hisdivisions, as the times do brawl, Are in three heads: one power against the French, And one against Glendower;perforce a third Must take up us. So is the unfirm King In three divided, and his coffers sound With hollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his several strengths together And come against us in full puissance Need not be dreaded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he should do so, He leaves his back unarmed, the French and Welsh Baying him at the heels. Never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland; Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth; But who is substituted against the French I have no certain notice.
Let us on, And publish the occasion of our arms. Thecommonwealth is sick of their own choice. Their over-greedy love hath surfeited. An habitation giddy andunsure Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart. O thou fond many, with what loud applause Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke Before he was what thouwouldst have him be. And being now trimmed in thine owndesires, Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him That thou provok’st thyself to cast him up. So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge Thy glutton bosom of theroyal Richard, And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up And howl’st to find it. What trust is in these times? They that, when Richard lived, would have him die Are now become enamored on his grave. Thou, that threw’st dust upon his goodly head When through proud London he came sighing on After th' admired heels of Bolingbroke, Criest now “O earth, yield us that King again, And take thou this!” O thoughts of men accursed! Past and to comeseems best; things present, worst.
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are time’s subjects, and time bids begone.
Master Fang, have you entered the action?
It is entered.
Where’s your yeoman? Is ’t a lusty yeoman? Will a' stand to ’t?
Sirrah! Where’s Snare?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, ay, good Master Snare.
Here, here.
Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.
Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him and all.
It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good faith. He cares not what mischief he does. If his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
No, nor I neither. I’ll be at your elbow.
An I but fist him once, an he come but within my vue—
I am undone by his going. I warrant you, he’s an infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master Fang, hold him sure. Good Master Snare, let him not ’scape. He comes continuantly to Pie Corner, saving your manhoods, to buy a saddle, and he is indited to dinner to the Lubber’s Head in Lumbert Street, to Master Smooth’s the silkman. I pray you, since my exion is entered, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be brought into his answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor lone woman to bear, and I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed off, and fubbed off from this day to that day, that it is a shameto be thought on. There is no honesty in such dealing, unless a woman should be made an ass and a beast to bearevery knave’s wrong. Yonder he comes, and that errant malmsey-nose knave, Bardolph, with him. Do your offices,do your offices, Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! Whose mare’s dead? What’s the matter?
Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.
Away, varlets!—Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off the villain’shead. Throw the quean in the channel.
Throw me in the channel? I’ll throw thee in the channel. Wilt thou, wilt thou, thou bastardly rogue? —Murder, murder! — Ah, thou honeysuckle villain, wilt thoukill God’s officers and the King’s? Ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a man-queller, and a woman-queller.
Keep them off, Bardolph.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A rescue, a rescue!
Good people, bring a rescue or two. — [to FALSTAFF ] Thou wot, wot thou? Thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou rogue. Do, thou hempseed.
Away, you scullion, you rampallion, you fustilarian! I’ll tickle your catastrophe.
What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!
Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you stand to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Sir John? What, are you brawling here? Doth this become your place, your time, and business? You should have been well on your way to York. — [to FANG] Stand from him, fellow: wherefore hang’st thou upon him?
O my most worshipful lord, an ’t please your Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
For what sum?
It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all I have. He hath eaten me out of house and home. He hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his. [to FALSTAFF] But I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee o' nights like the mare.
I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have any vantage of ground to get up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How comes this, Sir John? Fie, what man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by her own?
[to MISTRESS QUICKLY] What is the gross sum that I owe thee?
Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin chamber at the round tableby a sea-coal fire, upon Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for liking his father to a singing-man of Windsor, thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech, the butcher’s wife, come in then and call me Gossip Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar; telling us she had a good dish of prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee they were ill for a green wound? And didst thou not, when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity with such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam? And didst thou not kiss me and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it if thou canst.
My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and down the town that her eldest son is like you. She hath been in good case, and the truth is, poverty hath distracted her. But, for these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress against them.
Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such more than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practiced upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses both in purse and in person.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, in truth, my lord.
Pray thee, peace. — [to FALSTAFF] Pay her the debt you owe her, and unpay the villany you have done her. The one you may do with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.
My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without reply. You call honorable boldness “impudent sauciness.” If a man will make curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble duty remembered, I will not be your suitor. I say to you, I do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty employment in the King’s affairs.
You speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy this poor woman.
Come hither, hostess.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Master Gower, what news?
The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells.
As I am a gentleman!
Faith, you said so before.
As I am a gentleman. Come. No more words of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain to pawn both my plate and the tapestry of my dining chambers.
Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. And for thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal or the German hunting in waterwork is worth a thousand of these bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound, if thou canst. Come, an’twere not for thy humors, there’s not a better wench in England. Go wash thy face, and draw the action. Come,thou must not be in this humor with me. Dost not know me? Come, come, I know thou wast set on to this.
Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles. I' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me, la.
Let it alone. I’ll make other shift. You’ll be a fool still.
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown. I hope you’ll come to supper. You’ll pay me all together?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will I live? [to BARDOLPH] Go with her, with her. Hook on, hook on.
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?
No more words. Let’s have her.
I have heard better news.
What’s the news, my good lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where lay the King last night?
At Basingstoke, my lord.
I hope, my lord, all’s well. What is the news, my lord?
Come all his forces back?
No; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
You shall have letters of me presently. Come. Go along with me, good Master Gower.
My lord!
What’s the matter?
Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must wait upon my good lord here. I thank you, good Sir John.
Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to take soldiers up in counties as you go.
Will you sup with me, Master Gower?
What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir John?
Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool thattaught them me.—This is the right fencing grace, my lord: tap for tap, and so part fair.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now the Lord lighten thee. Thou art a great fool.
Before God, I am exceeding weary.
Is ’t come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.
Faith, it does me; though it discolors the complexion of my greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vilely in me to desire small beer?
Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a composition.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Belike then my appetite was not princely got, for, by my troth, I do now remember the poor creature small beer. But indeed these humble considerations make me outof love with my greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or to know thy face tomorrow, or to take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hast—with these, and those that were thy peach-colored ones —or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as, one forsuperfluity and another for use. But that the tennis-court keeper knows better than I, for it is a lowebb of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of the low countries have made a shift to eat up thy holland; and God knows whether those that bawl out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit His kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault, whereupon the world increases and kindreds are mightily strengthened.
How ill it follows, after you have labored so hard, youshould talk so idly! Tell me, how many good young princes would do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?
Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?
Yes, faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to. I stand the push of your one thing that you willtell.
Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad,now my father is sick —albeit I could tell thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad indeed too.
Very hardly, upon such a subject.
By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil’s book as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and persistency. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my father is so sick: and keeping such vile company as thou art hath in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.
The reason?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?
I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.
It would be every man’s thought, and thou art a blessed fellow to think as every man thinks. Never a man’s thought in the world keeps the roadway better than thine. Every man would think me an hypocrite indeed. Andwhat accites your most worshipful thought to think so?
Why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to Falstaff.
And to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this light, I am well spoke on. I can hear it with my own ears. The worst that they can say of me is that Iam a second brother, and that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two things, I confess, I cannot help. By the Mass, here comes Bardolph.
And the boy that I gave Falstaff. He had him from me Christian, and look if the fat villain have not transformed him ape.
God save your Grace.
And yours, most noble Bardolph.
[to BARDOLPH] Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing? Wherefore blush you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms are you become! Is ’t such a matter to get a pottle-pot’s maidenhead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red lattice, and I could discern no part of his face from the window. At last I spied his eyes, and methought he had made twoholes in the ale-wife’s new petticoat and so peeped through.
Has not the boy profited?
Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!
Away, you rascally Althea’s dream, away!
Instruct us, boy. What dream, boy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, my lord, Althea dreamt she was delivered of a firebrand, and therefore I call him her dream.
A crown’s worth of good interpretation. There ’tis, boy.
O, that this good blossom could be kept from cankers! Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
An you do not make him hanged among you, the gallows shall have wrong.
And how doth thy master, Bardolph?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, my good lord. He heard of your Grace’s coming to town. There’s a letter for you.
Delivered with good respect. And how doth the Martlemasyour master?
In bodily health, sir.
Marry, the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him. Though that be sick, it dies not.
[reads to himself] I do allow this wen to be as familiar with me as my dog, and he holds his place, for look you how be writes. [he hands the letter to POINS]
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reads] John Falstaff, knight. Every man must know that as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those that are kin to the King , for they never prick their finger but they say, “There’s some of the King’s blood spilt.” “How comes that?” says he that takes upon him not to conceive. The answer is as ready as a borrower’s cap: “I am the King’s poor cousin, sir.”
Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it fromJapheth. But to the letter. [takes the letter and reads]Sir John alstaff, knight, to the son of the King nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales, greeting.
Why, this is a certificate.
Peace! [reads] I will imitate the honorable Romans in brevity.
He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reads] I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins, for he misuses thy favors so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister Nell. Repent at idle times as thou mayest, and so, farewell. Thine by yea and no, which is as much as to say, as thou usest him, Jack Falstaff withmy familiars, John with my brothers and sisters, and Sir John with all Europe.
My lord, I’ll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.
That’s to make him eat twenty of his words. But do you use me thus, Ned? Must I marry your sister?
God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.
Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. [to BARDOLPH] Is your master here in London?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, my lord.
Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.
What company?
Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sup any women with him?
None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll Tearsheet.
What pagan may that be?
A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master’s.
Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.— Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am your shadow, my lord. I’ll follow you.
Sirrah—you, boy—and Bardolph, no word to your master that I am yet come to town. [gives them money] There’s for your silence.
I have no tongue, sir.
And for mine, sir, I will govern it.
Fare you well. Go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.
I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Alban’s and London.
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself tonight in histrue colors, and not ourselves be seen?
Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table as drawers.
From a god to a bull: a heavy decension. It was Jove’s case. From a prince to a 'prentice: a low transformationthat shall be mine, for in everything the purpose must weigh with the folly. Follow me, Ned.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter, Give evenway unto my rough affairs. Put not you on the visage ofthe times And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.
I have given over. I will speak no more. Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.
Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn, And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.
O yet, for God’s sake, go not to these wars. The time was, father, that you broke your word, When you were more endeared to it than now, When your own Percy, when my heart’s dear Harry, Threw many a northward look to see his father Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain. Who then persuaded you to stay at home? There weretwo honors lost, yours and your son’s. For yours, the God of heaven brighten it. For his, it stuck upon him asthe sun In the gray vault of heaven , and by his light Did all the chivalry of England move To do brave acts. Hewas indeed the glass Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves. He had no legs that practiced not his gait; And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish, Becamethe accents of the valiant; For those that could speak low and tardily Would turn their own perfection to abuse To seem like him. So that in speech, in gait, In diet, in affections of delight, In military rules, humors of blood, He was the mark and glass, copy and book, That fashioned others. And him—O wondrous him! O miracle of men!—him did you leave, Second to none, unseconded by you, To look upon the hideous god of war In disadvantage, to abide a field Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur’s name Did seem defensible. So you lefthim . Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong To hold your honor more precise and nice With others than with him. Let them alone. The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong. Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers, Today might I, hanging on Hotspur’s neck, Have talked of Monmouth’s grave.
Beshrew your heart, Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me With new lamenting ancient oversights. But I must go and meet with danger there, Or it will seekme in another place And find me worse provided.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, fly to Scotland Till that the nobles and the armèd commons Have of their puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground and vantage of the King, Then join you with them like a rib of steel To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves, First let them try themselves. So did your son; He was so suffered. So cameI a wid ow, And never shall have length of life enough To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven For recordation to my noblehusband.
Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind As with the tide swelled up unto his height, That makes a still-stand, running neither way. Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop, But many thousand reasons hold me back. I will resolve for Scotland. There am I Till time and vantage crave my company.
What the devil hast thou brought there—applejohns? Thouknowest Sir John cannot endure an applejohn.
Mass, thou sayest true. The Prince once set a dish of applejohns before him and told him there were five more Sir Johns and, putting off his hat, said “I will now take my leave of these six dry, round, old, withered knights.” It angered him to the heart. But he hath forgot that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, cover, and set them down, and see if thou canst find out Sneak’s noise. Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear some music.
Dispatch: the room where they supped is too hot. They’ll come in straight.
Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and Sir John must not know of it. Bardolph hath brought word.
By the Mass, here will be old utis. It will be an excellent stratagem.
I’ll see if I can find out Sneak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent good temperality. Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart would desire, and your color, Iwarrant you, is as red as any rose, in good truth, la . But, i' faith, you have drunk too much canaries, and that’s a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can say “What’s this?” How do you now?
Better than I was. Hem.
Why, that’s well said. A good heart’s worth gold. Lo, here comes Sir John.
[sings] When Arthur first in court —Empty the jordan. [sings] And was a worthy king — How now, Mistress Doll?
Sick of a calm, yea, good faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So is all her sect. An they be once in a calm, they aresick.
A pox damn you, muddy rascal. Is that all the comfort you give me?
You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.
I make them? Gluttony and diseases make them; I make them not.
If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to makethe diseases, Doll. We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you. Grant that, my poor virtue, grant that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
Your broaches, pearls, and ouches—for to serve bravely is to come halting off, you know; to come off the breachwith his pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely, to venture upon the charged chambers bravely—
Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
By my troth, this is the old fashion. You two never meet but you fall to some discord. You are both, i' goodtruth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts. You cannot one bear with another’s confirmities. What the good-year! One must bear, and that must be you. You are the weaker vessel, as they say, the emptier vessel.
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? There’s a whole merchant’s venture of Bourdeaux stuff in him. You have not seen a hulk better stuffed in the hold. — Come, I’ll be friends with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, Ancient Pistol’s below and would speak with you.
Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither. It is the foul-mouthed’st rogue in England.
If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by my faith, I must live among my neighbors. I’ll no swaggerers: I amin good name and fame with the very best. S hut the door. There comes no swaggerers here. I have not lived all this while to have swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.
Dost thou hear, hostess?
Pray you pacify yourself, Sir John. There comes no swaggerers here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.
Tilly-vally, Sir John, ne'er tell me. And your ancient swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick, the debuty t' other day, and, as he said to me—’twas no longer ago than Wednesday last, i' good faith— “Neighbour Quickly,” says he—Master Dumb, our minister, was by then—“Neighbour Quickly,” says he, “receive those that are civil, for,” said he, “you are in an ill name.” Now he said so, I can tell whereupon. “For,” says he, “you are an honest woman, and well thought on. Therefore take heed what guests you receive.Receive,” says he, “no swaggering companions.” There comes none here. You would bless you to hear what he said. No, I’ll no swaggerers.
He’s no swaggerer, hostess, a tame cheater, i' faith. You may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound. He’llnot swagger with a Barbary hen if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance. —Call him up, drawer.
“Cheater,” call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no cheater, but I do not love swaggering. By my troth, I am the worse when one says “swagger.” Feel, masters, how I shake; look you, I warrant you.
So you do, hostess.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an ’twere an aspen leaf. I cannot abide swaggerers.
God save you, Sir John.
Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I charge you with a cup of sack. Do you discharge upon mine hostess.
I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.
She is pistol-proof. Sir, you shall not hardly offend her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, I’ll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I’ll drink no more than will do me good, for no man’s pleasure, I.
Then to you, Mistress Dorothy! I will charge you.
Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! I am meat for your master.
I know you, Mistress Dorothy.
Away, you cutpurse rascal, you filthy bung, away! By this wine, I’ll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal, you basket-hilt stale juggler, you. Since when, I pray you, sir? God’s light, with two points on your shoulder? Much!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.
No more, Pistol. I would not have you go off here. Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.
No, good Captain Pistol, not here, sweet captain.
Captain? Thou abominable damned cheater, art thou not ashamed to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you out for taking their names upon you before you have earned them. You a captain? You slave, for what? For tearing a poor whore’sruff in a bawdy house? He a captain! Hang him, rogue. He lives upon mouldy stewed prunes and dried cakes. A captain? God’s light, these villains will make the word as odious as the word “occupy,” which was an excellent good word before it was ill sorted. Therefore captains had need look to ’t.
Pray thee go down, good ancient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.
Not I. I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her. I’ll be revenged of her.
Pray thee go down.
I’ll see her damned first to Pluto’s damnèd lake, by this hand, to th' infernal deep with Erebus and torturesvile also. Hold hook and line, say I. Down, down, dogs!Down, Fates! Have we not Hiren here?
Good Captain Peesell, be quiet. 'Tis very late, i' faith. I beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These be good humors indeed. Shall pack-horses And hollow pampered jades of Asia, which cannot go but thirty mile a day, Compare with Caesars and with cannibals, and Troyant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let the welkin roar. Shall we fall foul for toys?
By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.
Begone, good ancient. This will grow to a brawl anon.
Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have we not Hiren here?
O' my word, captain, there’s none such here. What the good- year, do you think I would deny her? For God’s sake, be quiet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis. Come, give ’s some sack. Si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento. Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire. Give me some sack, and, sweetheart, lie thou there. [lays down his sword] Come we to full points here? And are etceteras nothing?
Pistol, I would be quiet.
Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What, we have seen the seven stars.
For God’s sake, thrust him downstairs. I cannot endure such a fustian rascal.
“Thrust him downstairs?" Know we not Galloway nags?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat shilling. Nay, an he do nothing but speak nothing, he shall be nothing here.
Come, get you downstairs.
What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue? [ snatches up his sword] Then death rock me asleep, abridgemy doleful days. Why then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds untwine the Sisters Three. Come, Atropos, I say.
Here’s goodly stuff toward!
Give me my rapier, boy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee do not draw.
Get you downstairs. [drawing and driving PISTOL out]
Here’s a goodly tumult. I’ll forswear keeping house afore I’ll be in these tirrits and frights. So, murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas, put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.
I pray thee, Jack, be quiet. The rascal’s gone. Ah, youwhoreson little valiant villain, you.
Are you not hurt i' the groin? Methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have you turned him out o' doors?
Yea, sir. The rascal’s drunk. You have hurt him, sir, i' the shoulder.
A rascal to brave me!
Ah, you sweet little rogue, you. Alas, poor ape, how thou sweat’st! Come, let me wipe thy face. Come on, you whoreson chops. Ah, rogue, i' faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!
Ah, rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do, an thou darest for thy heart. An thou dost, I’ll canvass thee between a pair of sheets.
The music is come, sir.
Let them play.—Play, sirs.—Sit on my knee, Doll. A rascal bragging slave! The rogue fled from me like quicksilver.
I' faith, and thou followed’st him like a church. Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig , when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and foining a-nights and begin topatch up thine old body for heaven?
Peace, good Doll. Do not speak like a death’s-head; do not bid me remember mine end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirrah, what humor’s the Prince of?
A good shallow young fellow, he would have made a good pantler; he would a' chipped bread well.
They say Poins has a good wit.
He a good wit? Hang him, baboon. His wit’s as thick as Tewksbury mustard. There’s no more conceit in him than is in a mallet.
Why does the Prince love him so then?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Because their legs are both of a bigness, and he plays at quoits well, and eats conger and fennel, and drinks off candles' ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet stories, and such other gambol faculties he has that show a weak mind and an able body, for the which the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is such another. The weight of a hair will turn the scales between their avoirdupois.
[To POINS] Would not this nave of a wheel have his earscut off?
Let’s beat him before his whore.
Look whe'er the withered elder hath not his poll clawedlike a parrot.
Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive performance?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Kiss me, Doll.
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! What says th' almanac to that?
And look whether the fiery trigon, his man, be not lisping to his master’s old tables, his notebook, his counsel keeper.
[to DOLL] Thou dost give me flattering busses.
By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am old, I am old.
I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of them all.
What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive moneyo' Thursday; shalt have a cap tomorrow. A merry song! Come, it grows late. We’ll to bed. Thou 'lt forget me when I am gone.
By my troth, thou 'lt set me a-weeping an thou sayest so. Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till thy return. Well, harken a' th' end.
Some sack, Francis.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Anon, anon, sir.
Ha? A bastard son of the King’s?—And art not thou Poinshis brother?
Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou lead?
A better than thou. I am a gentleman. Thou art a drawer.
Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, the Lord preserve thy good Grace! By my troth, welcome to London. Now the Lord bless that sweet face ofthine. O Jesu, are you come from Wales?
Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, [indicating DOLL] by this light flesh and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.
How? You fat fool, I scorn you.
My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turnall to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
You whoreson candle-mine, you how vilely did you speak of me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God’s blessing of your good heart, and so she is, by mytroth.
Didst thou hear me?
Yea, and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by Gad’s Hill. You knew I was at your back, and spoke it onpurpose to try my patience.
No, no, no; not so. I did not think thou wast within hearing.
I shall drive you, then, to confess the wilfull abuse, and then I know how to handle you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No abuse, Hal, o' mine honor, no abuse.
Not to dispraise me and call me pantier and bread-chipper and I know not what?
No abuse, Hal.
No abuse?
No abuse, Ned, i' th' world, honest Ned, none. I dispraised him before the wicked, that the wicked might not fall in love with thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a careful friend and a true subject, and thyfather is to give me thanks for it. No abuse, Hal. —None, Ned, none. No, faith, boys, none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us. Is she of the wicked, is thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the wicked, or honest Bardolph,whose zeal burns in his nose, of the wicked?
Answer, thou dead elm, answer.
The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable, and his face is Lucifer’s privy kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms. For the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the devil outbids him too.
For the women?
For one of them, she’s in hell already and burns poor souls. For the other, I owe her money, and whether she be damned for that I know not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I warrant you.
No, I think thou art not; I think thou art quit for that. Marry, there is another indictment upon thee for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house contrary to thelaw, for the which I think thou wilt howl.
All vitlars do so. What’s a joint of mutton or two in awhole Lent?
You, gentlewoman.
What says your Grace?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there, Francis.
Peto, how now, what news?
The King your father is at Westminster, And there are twenty weak and wearied posts Come from the north, and as I came along I met and overtook a dozen captains, Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns And asking everyone for Sir John Falstaff.
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame So idly to profane the precious time When tempest of commotion, like the south Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt And drop upon our bare unarmèd heads. — Give me my sword and cloak. —Falstaff, good night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we must hence and leave it unpicked.
More knocking at the door?
How now, what’s the matter?
You must away to court, sir, presently. A dozen captains stay at door for you.
[to the PAGE] Pay the musicians, sirrah. —Farewell, hostess .—Farewell, Doll. You see, my good wenches, how men of merit are sought after. The undeserver may sleep when the man of action is called on. Farewell, good wenches. If I be not sent away post, I will see you againere I go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to burst—well,sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.
Farewell, farewell.
Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these twenty-nine years, come peascod time, but an honester and truer-hearted man—well, fare thee well.
[within] Mistress Tearsheet!
What’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.
O, run, Doll, run, run, good Doll. Come.—She comes blubbered.—Yea! Will you come, Doll?
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick; But, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters And well consider of them. Make good speed.
How many thousand of my poorest subjects Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep, Nature’s soft nurse, how have I frighted thee, That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down And steep my senses in forgetfulness? Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs, Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber, Than in the perfumed chambers of the great, Under the canopies of costly state, And lull’d with sound of sweetest melody? O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile In loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch A watch-caseor a common 'larum bell? Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast Seal up the shipboy’s eyes, and rock his brains In cradle of the rude imperious surge And in the visitation of the winds, Who take the ruffian billows bythe top, Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them With deafening clamor in the slippery clouds That with the hurly death itself awakes? Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude, And, in the calmest and most stillest night, With all appliances and means to boot, Deny it to a king? Then, happy low, lie down. Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Many good morrows to your Majesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it good morrow, lords?
'Tis one o'clock, and past.
Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords. Have you read o'er the letter that I sent you?
We have, my liege.
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom How foul it is, what rank diseases grow And with what danger near the heart of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is but as a body yet distempered, Which to his former strength may be restored With good advice and little medicine. My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.
O God, that one might read the book of fate And see therevolution of the times Make mountains level, and the continent, Weary of solid firmness, melt itself Into thesea, and other times to see The beachy girdle of the ocean Too wide for Neptune’s hips; how chance’s mocks And changes fill the cup of alteration With divers liquors! O, if this were seen, The happiest youth, viewing his progress through, What perils past, what crosses to ensue, Would shut the book, and sit him down and die. 'Tis not ten years gone Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends, Did feast together, and in two years after Were they at wars. It is but eight years since This Percy was the man nearest my soul, Who like a brother toiled in my affairs And laid his love and life under my foot, Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard Gave him defiance. But which of you was by — [to WARWICK] You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember— When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears, Then checkedand rated by Northumberland, Did speak these words, nowproved a prophecy? “Northumberland, thou ladder by the which My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne” — Though then, God knows, I had no such intent, But that necessity so bowed the state That I and greatness were compelled to kiss — “The time shall come,” thus did he follow it, “The time will come that foul sin, gathering head, Shall break into corruption” —so went on, Foretelling this same time’s condition And the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men’s lives Figuring the nature of the times deceased, The which observed, a man may prophesy, With a near aim, of the main chance of things As yet not come to life, which in their seeds Andweak beginnings lie intreasurèd. Such things become thehatch and brood of time, And by the necessary form of this, King Richard might create a perfect guess That great Northumberland, then false to him, Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness, Which should not find a ground to root upon Unless on you.
Are these things then necessities? Then let us meet them like necessities. And that same word even now criesout on us. They say the Bishop and Northumberland Are fifty thousand strong.
It cannot be, my lord. Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo, The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord, The powers that you already have sent forth Shall bring thisprize in very easily. To comfort you the more, I have received A certain instance that Glendower is dead. YourMajesty hath been this fortnight ill, And these unseasoned hours perforce must add Unto your sickness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will take your counsel. And were these inward warsonce out of hand, We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.
Come on, come on, come on. Give me your hand, sir, giveme your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood. And how doth my good cousin Silence?
Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.
And how doth my cousin your bedfellow? And your fairestdaughter and mine, my goddaughter Ellen?
Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford still, is he not?
Indeed, sir, to my cost.
He must then to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was once of Clement’s Inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
You were called “Lusty Shallow” then, cousin.
By the Mass, I was called anything, and I would have done anything indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, a Cotswold man. You had not four such swinge-bucklers in all the Inns o' Court again. And I may say to you, we knew where the bona robas were and had the best of them all at commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?
The same Sir John, the very same. I see him break Scoggin’s head at the court gate, when he was a crack not thus high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Grey’s Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I have spent! And to see how many of my old acquaintance are dead.
We shall all follow, cousin.
Certain, ’tis certain; very sure, very sure. Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all. All shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford Fair?
By my troth, cousin, I was not there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Death is certain. Is old Dooble of your town living yet?
Dead, sir.
Jesu, Jesu, dead! He drew a good bow, and dead? He shota fine shoot. John o' Gaunt loved him well, and betted much money on his head. Dead! He would have clapped i' th' clout at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man’s heart good to see. How a score of ewesnow?
Thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.
And is old Dooble dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here come two of Sir John Falstaff’s men, as I think.
Good morrow, honest gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?
I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this countyand one of the King’s justices of the peace. What is your good pleasure with me?
My captain, sir, commends him to you, my captain, Sir John Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant leader.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good backsword man. How doth the good knight? May I ask how my lady hiswife doth?
Sir, pardon. A soldier is better accommodated than witha wife.
It is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said indeed too. “Better accommodated.” It is good, yea, indeed, is it. Good phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable. “Accommodated.” It comes of accommodo .Very good, a good phrase.
Pardon, sir; I have heard the word—“phrase” call you it? By this day, I know not the phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword to be a soldierlike word, and a word of exceeding good command, by heaven. “Accommodated,” that is when a man is, as they say, accommodated, or when a man is being whereby he may be thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.
It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir John. —Give me your good hand, give me your Worship’s good hand. By my troth, you like well and bear your years very well. Welcome, good Sir John.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow.—Master Sure-card, as I think?
No, Sir John. It is my cousin Silence, in commission with me.
Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of the peace.
Your good Worship is welcome.
Fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?
Let me see them, I beseech you.
Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see. So, so, so, so, so. So, so. Yea, marry, sir. —Rafe Mouldy! —Let them appear asI call, let them do so, let them do so. Let me see, where is Mouldy?
Here, an it please you.
What think you, Sir John? A good-limbed fellow; young, strong, and of good friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is thy name Mouldy?
Yea, an ’t please you.
'Tis the more time thou wert used.
Ha, ha, ha, most excellent, i' faith! Things that are mouldy lack use. Very singular good, in faith. Well said, Sir John, very well said.
Prick him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was pricked well enough before, an you could have letme alone. My old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry and her drudgery. You need not to have pricked me. There are other men fitter to go out than I.
Go to. Peace, Mouldy. You shall go. Mouldy, it is time you were spent.
Spent?
Peace, fellow, peace. Stand aside. Know you where you are? —For th' other, Sir John. Let me see. —Simon Shadow!
Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under. He’s like to be a cold soldier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where’s Shadow?
Here, sir.
Shadow, whose son art thou?
My mother’s son, sir.
Thy mother’s son! Like enough, and thy father’s shadow. So the son of the female is the shadow of the male. It is often so, indeed, but much of the father’s substance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you like him, Sir John?
Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him, for we have a number of shadows to fill up the muster book.
Thomas Wart!
Where’s he?
Here, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is thy name Wart?
Yea, sir.
Thou art a very ragged wart.
Shall I prick him down, Sir John?
It were superfluous, for his apparel is built upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. Prick him nomore.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha, ha. You can do it, sir, you can do it. I commend you well.—Francis Feeble!
Here, sir.
What trade art thou, Feeble?
A woman’s tailor, sir.
Shall I prick him, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may, but if he had been a man’s tailor, he’d ha' pricked you.—Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy’s battle as thou hast done in a woman’s petticoat?
I will do my good will, sir. You can have no more.
Well said, good woman’s tailor, well said, courageous Feeble. Thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse. —Prick the woman’s tailor well, Master Shallow, deep, Master Shallow.
I would Wart might have gone, sir.
I would thou wert a man’s tailor, that thou mightst mend him and make him fit to go. I cannot put him to a private soldier that is the leader of so many thousands.Let that suffice, most forcible Feeble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall suffice, sir.
I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble.—Who is next?
Peter Bullcalf o' th' green.
Yea, marry, let’s see Bullcalf.
Here, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fore God, a likely fellow. Come, prick me Bullcalf tillhe roar again.
O Lord, good my lord captain—
What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?
O Lord, sir, I am a diseased man.
What disease hast thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I caught withringing in the King’s affairs upon his coronation day, sir.
Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown. We will have away thy cold, and I will take such order that my friends shall ring for thee .— [to SHALLOW ] Is here all?
Here is two more called than your number. You must havebut four here, sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.
Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to see you, by my troth, Master Shallow.
O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the windmill in Saint George’s Field?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more of that, good Master Shallow, no more of that.
Ha, ’twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?
She lives, Master Shallow.
She never could away with me.
Never, never; she would always say she could not abide Master Shallow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the Mass, I could anger her to th' heart. She was then a bona roba. Doth she hold her own well?
Old, old, Master Shallow.
Nay, she must be old. She cannot choose but be old. Certain, she’s old, and had Robin Nightwork by old Nightwork before I came to Clement’s Inn.
That’s fifty-five year ago.
Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that thisknight and I have seen!—Ha, Sir John, said I well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.
That we have, that we have, that we have. In faith, SirJohn, we have. Our watchword was “Hem, boys.” Come, let’s to dinner; come, let’s to dinner. Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.
Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend, and here’s four Harry ten-shillings in French crowns for you. In very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged, sir, as go. And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care, but rather because I am unwilling, and, for mine own part, have a desire to stay with my friends. Else, sir, I did not care, for mine own part, so much.
Go to. Stand aside.
And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my old dame’s sake, stand my friend. She has nobody to do anything about her when I am gone, and she is old and cannot helpherself: You shall have forty, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to. Stand aside.
By my troth, I care not. A man can die but once. We oweGod a death. I’ll ne'er bear a base mind. An ’t be my destiny, so; an ’t be not, so. No man’s too good to serve ’s prince, and let it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next.
Well said. Th' art a good fellow.
Faith, I’ll bear no base mind.
Come, sir, which men shall I have?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Four of which you please.
Sir, a word with you. [aside to FALSTAFF] I have three pound to free Mouldy and Bullcalf.
Go to, well.
Come, Sir John, which four will you have?
Do you choose for me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.
Mouldy and Bullcalf! For you, Mouldy, stay at home tillyou are past service. —And for your part, Bullcalf, growtill you come unto it. I will none of you.
Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong. They are your likeliest men, and I would have you served with thebest.
Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a man?Care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and bigassemblance of a man? Give me the spirit, Master Shallow.Here’s Wart. You see what a ragged appearance itis. He shall charge you and discharge you with the motion of apewterer’s hammer, come off and on swifter than he thatgibbets on the brewer’s bucket. And this same half-facedfellow, Shadow, give me this man. He presents no mark tothe enemy. The foeman may with as great aim level at theedge of a penknife. And for a retreat, how swiftly will thisFeeble the woman’s tailor,run off! O, give me the sparemen, and spare me the great ones. —Put me a caliver into Wart’s hand, Bardolph.
Hold, Wart. Traverse. Thas, thas, thas.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, manage me your caliver: so, very well, go to, very good, exceeding good. O, give me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald shot. Well said, i' faith, Wart. Th' art a good scab. Hold, there’s a tester for thee.
He is not his craft’s master. He doth not do it right. I remember at Mile End Green, when I lay at Clement’s Inn— I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur’s show —there was alittle quiver fellow, and he would manage you his piecethus. And he would about and about, and come you in, and come you in. “Rah, tah, tah,” would he say. “Bounce,” would he say, and away again would he go, and again would he come. I shall ne'er see such a fellow.
These fellows will do well, Master Shallow. —God keep you, Master Silence. I will not use many words with you. Fare you well, gentlemen both. I thank you. I must a dozen mile to-night. —Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.
Sir John, the Lord bless you. God prosper your affairs.God send us peace. At your return, visit our house. Letour old acquaintance be renewed. Peradventure I will with you to the court.
Fore God, would you would, Master Shallow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to. I have spoke at a word. God keep you.
Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.
On, Bardolph. Lead the men away.
As I return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see the bottom of Justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath done about Turnbull Street, and every third word a lie, duer paid to the hearer than the Turk’s tribute. I do remember himat Clement’s Inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese paring. When he was naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife. He was so forlorn that his dimensions to any thick sight were invincible. He was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey, and the whores called him “mandrake.” He came ever in the rearward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the overscutched huswives that he heard the carmen whistle, and swore they were his fancies or his good-nights. And now is this Vice’s dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly of John o' Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him, and I’ll be sworn he ne'er saw him but once in the tilt-yard, and then he burst his head for crowding among the Marshal’s men. I saw it and told John o' Gaunt he beat his own name, for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a court. And now has he land and beefs. Well, I’ll be acquainted with him, if I return, and ’t shall go hard but I’ll make him a philosopher’s two stones to me. If the young dace be a bait for the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and there an end.
What is this forest called?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis Gaultree Forest, an ’t shall please your Grace.
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth To know the numbers of our enemies.
We have sent forth already.
'Tis well done. My friends and brethren in these great affairs, I must acquaint you that I have received New-dated letters from Northumberland, Their cold intent,tenor, and substance, thus: Here doth he wish his person, with such powers As might hold sortance with hisquality, The which he could not levy; whereupon He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes, To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers That your attempts may overlive the hazard And fearful melting of their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground And dash themselves to pieces.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, what news?
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile, In goodly form comes on the enemy, And, by the ground they hide, Ijudge their number Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we gave them out. Let us sway on and face them in the field.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Health and fair greeting from our general, The Prince Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace, What doth concern your coming.
Then, my lord, Unto your Grace do I in chief address The substance of my speech. If that rebellion Came like itself, in base and abject routs, Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags, And countenanced by boys and beggary I say, if damn’d commotion so appeared In his true, native, and most proper shape, You, reverend father, and these noble lords Had not been here to dressthe ugly form Of base and bloody insurrection With yourfair honors. You, Lord Archbishop, Whose see is by a civil peace maintained, Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched, Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored, Whose white investments figure innocence, The dove and very blessèd spirit of peace, Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace, Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war, Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood, Your pens to lances, and yourtongue divine To a trumpet and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this? So the question stands. Briefly, to this end: we are all diseased, And with our surfeiting and wanton hours Have brought ourselves into a burning fever, And we must bleed for it; of which disease Our late King Richard, being infected, died. But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland, I take not on mehere as a physician, Nor do I as an enemy to peace Troop in the throngs of military men, But rather show awhile like fearful war To diet rank minds sick of happiness And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly. I have inequal balance justly weighed What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer, And find our griefs heavier than our offenses. We see which way the stream of time doth run And are enforced from our most quiet there By the rough torrent of occasion, And have the summary of all our griefs, When time shall serve, to show in articles; Which long ere this we offered to the King Andmight by no suit gain our audience. When we are wrongedand would unfold our griefs, We are denied access unto his person Even by those men that most have done us wrong. The dangers of the days but newly gone, Whose memory is written on the earth With yet appearing blood, and the examples Of every minute’s instance, present now, Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms, Not to break peace or any branch of it, But to establish here apeace indeed, Concurring both in name and quality.
When ever yet was your appeal denied? Wherein have you been gallèd by the King? What peer hath been suborned tograte on you, That you should seal this lawless bloody book Of forged rebellion with a seal divine And consecrate commotion’s bitter edge?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My brother general, the commonwealth, To brother born an household cruelty, I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any such redress, Or if there were,it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to us all That feel the bruises of the days before And suffer the condition of these times To lay a heavy and unequal hand Upon our honors?
O, my good Lord Mowbray, Construe the times to theirnecessities, And you shall say indeed it is the time, And not the King, that doth you injuries. Yet for your part, it not appears to me Either from the King or in the present time That you should have an inch of any ground To build a grief on. Were you not restored To allthe Duke of Norfolk’s signories, Your noble and right well remembered father’s?
What thing, in honor, had my father lost, That need to be revived and breathed in me? The King that loved him, as the state stood then, Was force perforce compelled tobanish him, And then that Harry Bolingbroke and he, Being mounted and both rousèd in their seats, Their neighing coursers daring of the spur, Their armèd stavesin charge, their beavers down, Their eyes of fire sparking through sights of steel And the loud trumpet blowing them together, Then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed My father from the breast of Bolingbroke, O, when the King did throw his warder down— His own life hung upon the staff he threw— Then threw he down himself and all their lives That by indictment and by dint of sword Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what. The Earl of Hereford was reputed then In England the most valiant gentleman. Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled? But if your father had been victor there, He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry; For all the country in a general voice Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on And blessed and graced, indeed more than the King. But this is mere digression from my purpose. Here come I from our princely general To know your griefs, totell you from his Grace That he will give you audience; and wherein It shall appear that your demands are just, You shall enjoy them, everything set off That might so much as think you enemies.
But he hath forced us to compel this offer; And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so. This offer comes from mercy, not from fear. For, lo, within a ken our army lies, Upon mine honor, all too confident To give admittance to a thought of fear. Our battle is more fullof names than yours, Our men more perfect in the use ofarms, Our armor all as strong, our cause the best. Thenreason will our hearts should be as good. Say you not then our offer is compelled.
Well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.
That argues but the shame of your offense. A rotten case abides no handling.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hath the Prince John a full commission, In very ample virtue of his father, To hear and absolutely to determine Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
That is intended in the General’s name. I muse you makeso slight a question.
Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule, For this contains our general grievances. Each several article herein redressed, All members of our cause, bothhere and hence, That are insinewed to this action, Acquitted by a true substantial form And present execution of our wills To us and to our purposes confined, We come within our awful banks again And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
This will I show the General. Please you, lords, In sight of both our battles we may meet, And either end inpeace, which God so frame, Or to the place of difference call the swords Which must decide it.
My lord, we will do so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is a thing within my bosom tells me That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not that. If we can make our peace Upon such large terms and so absolute As our conditions shall consist upon, Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such That every slight and false-derivèd cause, Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason, Shall to the King taste of this action, That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love, We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff And good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary Of daintyand such picking grievances, For he hath found to end one doubt by death Revives two greater in the heirs of life; And therefore will he wipe his tables clean And keep no telltale to his memory That may repeat and history his loss To new remembrance. For full well he knows He cannot so precisely weed this land As his misdoubts present occasion; His foes are so enrooted with his friends That, plucking to unfix an enemy, He doth unfasten so and shake a friend; So that this land, like an offensive wife That hath enraged him on to offerstrokes, As he is striking holds his infant up And hangs resolved correction in the arm That was upreared to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods On late offenders, that he now doth lack The very instruments ofchastisement, So that his power, like to a fangless lion, May offer but not hold.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis very true, And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshal, If we do now make our atonement well, Our peace will, like a broken limb united, Grow stronger forthe breaking.
Be it so. Here is returned my Lord of Westmoreland.
The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your lordship To meet his Grace just distance ’tween our armies.
Your Grace of York, in God’s name then set forward.
Before, and greet his Grace.— [to WESTMORELAND] My lord, we come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are well encountered here, my cousin Mowbray.— Goodday to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,— And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all. — My Lord of York, it better showed with you When that your flock, assembled by the bell, Encircled you to hear with reverence Your exposition on the holy text Than now to see you here, aniron man talking, Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum, Turning the word to sword, and life to death. Thatman that sits within a monarch’s heart And ripens in the sunshine of his favor, Would he abuse the countenance of the King, Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord Bishop, It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken How deep you were within the books of God, To us the speakerin His parliament, To us th' imagined voice of God himself, The very opener and intelligencer Between the grace, the sanctities, of heaven, And our dull workings? O, who shall believe But you misuse the reverence of your place, Employ the countenance and grace of heaven As a false favorite doth his prince’s name, In deeds dishonorable? You have ta'en up, Under the counterfeitedzeal of God, The subjects of His substitute, my father, And both against the peace of heaven and him Have here up-swarmed them.
Good my Lord of Lancaster, I am not here against your father’s peace, But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland, The time misordered doth, in common sense, Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form To hold our safety up. Isent your Grace The parcels and particulars of our grief, The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court, Whereon this Hydra son of war is born, Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep With grant of our most just and right desires, And true obedience, of this madness cured, Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes To the last man.
And though we here fall down, We have supplies to second our attempt; If they miscarry, theirs shall second them, And so success of mischief shall be born, And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up Whiles England shall have generation.
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow To sound the bottom of the after-times.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly How far forth you do like their articles.
I like them all, and do allow them well, And swear hereby the honor of my blood, My father’s purposes have been mistook, And some about him have too lavishly Wrested his meaning and authority. [to ARCHBISHOP] My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redressed; Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you, Discharge your powers unto their several counties, As we will ours, and here, between the armies, Let’s drink togetherfriendly and embrace, That all their eyes may bear those tokens home Of our restorèd love and amity.
I take your princely word for these redresses.
I give it you, and will maintain my word, And thereuponI drink unto your Grace.
Go, captain, and deliver to the army This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part. I know it will well please them. Hie thee, captain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.
I pledge your Grace, and if you knew what pains I have bestowed to breed this present peace, You would drink freely. But my love to you Shall show itself more openlyhereafter.
I do not doubt you.
I am glad of it.— Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season, For I am on the sudden something ill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Against ill chances men are ever merry, But heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow Serves to say thus: “Some good thing comes tomorrow.”
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse if your own rule be true.
The word of peace is rendered. Hark how they shout.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This had been cheerful after victory.
A peace is of the nature of a conquest, For then both parties nobly are subdued, And neither party loser.
Go, my lord, And let our army be dischargèd too.
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains March by us, that we may peruse the men We should have coped withal.
Go, good Lord Hastings, And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.
Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The leaders, having charge from you to stand, Will not go off until they hear you speak.
They know their duties.
My lord, our army is dispersed already. Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses East, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up, Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good tidings, my Lord Hastings, for the which I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason. — And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray, Of capital treason I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just and honorable?
Is your assembly so?
Will you thus break your faith?
I pawned thee none. I promised you redress of these same grievances Whereof you did complain, which, by minehonor, I will perform with a most Christian care. But for you rebels, look to taste the due Meet for rebellionand such acts as yours. Most shallowly did you these arms commence, Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence. — Strike up our drums; pursue the scattered stray. God, and not we, hath safely fought today. — Some guard these traitors to the block of death, Treason’s true bedand yielder-up of breath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of what place, I pray?
I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the Dale.
Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is your degree, and your place the Dale. Colevile shall be stillyour name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall you be still Colevile of the Dale.
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?
As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do ye yield, sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers and they weep for thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do observanceto my mercy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.
I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine,and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name. An I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our general.
The heat is past. Follow no further now.
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while? Wheneverything is ended, then you come. These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life, One time or other break some gallows' back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus. I never knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valor. Do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet?Have I in my poor and old motion the expedition of thought? I have speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here, travel-tainted as I am, have in my pureand immaculate valor taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a most furious knight and valorous enemy. But whatof that? He saw me and yielded, that I may justly say, with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, “There, cousin, I came, saw, and overcame.”
It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.
I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him. And I beseech your Grace let it be booked with the rest of this day’s deeds, or, by the Lord, I will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the topon ’t, Colevile kissing my foot; to the which course ifI be enforced, if you do not all show like gilt twopences to me, and I in the clear sky of fame o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the element (which show like pins' heads to her), believe not the word of the noble. Therefore let me haveright, and let desert mount.
Thine’s too heavy to mount.
Let it shine, then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thine’s too thick to shine.
Let it do something, my good lord, that may do me good,and call it what you will.
Is thy name Colevile?
It is, my lord.
A famous rebel art thou, Colevile.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And a famous true subject took him.
I am, my lord, but as my betters are That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me, You should have won them dearer than you have.
I know not how they sold themselves, but thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis, and I thank thee for thee.
Now, have you left pursuit?
Retreat is made and execution stayed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Send Colevile with his confederates To York, to presentexecution.— Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords. I hear the King my father is sore sick. Our news shall go before us to his Majesty, [to WESTMORELAND ] Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him, And we with sober speed will follow you.
My lord, I beseech you give me leave to go through Gloucestershire, and, when you come to court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good report.
Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition, Shall better speak of you than you deserve.
I would you had but the wit; ’twere better than your dukedom. Good faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh. But that’s no marvel; he drinks no wine. There’s never none of these demure boys come to any proof, for thin drink doth so overcool their blood, and making many fish meals, that they fall into a kind of male green-sickness, and then, when they marry, they get wenches. They are generally fools and cowards, which some of us should be too, but for inflammation. A good sherris sack hath a two-fold operation in it. It ascendsme into the brain, dries me there all the foolish and dull and crudy vapors which environ it, makes it apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes, which, delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth, becomes excellentwit. The second property of your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood, which, before cold and settled, left the liver white and pale, which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice. But the sherris warms it and makes it course from the inwards to the parts' extremes. It illumineth the face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the vital commoners and inland petty spirits muster me all to their captain, the heart, who, great and puffed up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage, and this valor comes of sherris. Sothat skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil till sack commences it and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare land, manured, husbanded, and tilled with excellent endeavor of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant. If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle I would teach them should be to forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Bardolph?
The army is discharged all and gone.
Let them go. I’ll through Gloucestershire, and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire. I have him already temp'ring between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with him. Come away.
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end To this debate that bleedeth at our doors, We will our youth lead on to higher fields And draw no swords but what aresanctified. Our navy is addressed, our power collected, Our substitutes in absence well invested, And everything lies level to our wish. Only we want a littlepersonal strength; And pause us till these rebels now afoot Come underneath the yoke of government.
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty Shall soon enjoy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, Where is the Prince your brother?
I think he’s gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
And how accompanied?
I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my good lord, he is in presence here.
What would my lord and father?
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence. How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother? He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas. Thou hasta better place in his affection Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy, And noble offices thou mayst effect Of mediation, after I am dead, Between his greatness and thy other brethren. Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love, Nor lose the good advantage of his grace By seeming cold or careless of his will. For he is graciousif he be observed; He hath a tear for pity and a hand Open as day for melting charity; Yet notwithstanding, being incensed he is flint, As humorous as winter, and as sudden As flaws congealed in the spring of day. His temper therefore must be well observed. Chide him for faults, and do it reverently, When thou perceive his blood inclined to mirth; But, being moody, give him timeand scope Till that his passions, like a whale on ground, Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas, And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends, Ahoop of gold to bind thy brothers in, That the united vessel of their blood, Mingled with venom of suggestion (As, force perforce, the age will pour it in), Shall never leak, though it do work as strong As aconitum or rash gunpowder.
I shall observe him with all care and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is not there today; he dines in London.
And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?
With Poins and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds, And he, the noble image of my youth, Is overspread with them; therefore my grief Stretches itself beyond the hour of death. The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape, Informs imaginary, th' unguided days And rotten times that you shall look upon When I am sleeping with my ancestors. For when his headstrong riot hath no curb, When rage and hot blood are his counsellors, When means and lavish manners meet together, O, with what wings shall his affections fly Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite. The Princebut studies his companions Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language, 'Tis needful that the most immodest word Be looked upon and learned; which, once attained, Your Highness knows, comes to no further use But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms, ThePrince will, in the perfectness of time, Cast off his followers, and their memory Shall as a pattern or a measure live, By which his Grace must mete the lives of others, Turning past evils to advantages.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb In the dead carrion.
Who’s here? Westmoreland?
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness Added to thatthat I am to deliver. Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace’s hand. Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings,and all Are brought to the correction of your law. There is not now a rebel’s sword unsheathed But peace puts forth her olive everywhere. The manner how this action hath been borne Here at more leisure may your Highness read With every course in his particular.
O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird, Which ever in the haunch of winter sings The lifting up of day.
Here comes more news.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From enemies heaven keep your Majesty, And when they stand against you, may they fall As those that I am cometo tell you of. The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph, With a great power of English and of Scots, Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown. The manner and true order of the fight This packet, please it you, contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick? Willfortune never come with both hands full, But write her fair words still in foulest letters? She either gives a stomach and no food— Such are the poor, in health—or else a feast And takes away the stomach—such are the rich, That have abundance and enjoy it not. I should rejoice now at this happy news, And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy. O, me! Come near me, now I am much ill.
Comfort, your Majesty.
O, my royal father!
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be patient, princes. You do know these fits Are with his Highness very ordinary. Stand from him, give him air. He’ll straight be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs. Th' incessant care and labor of his mind Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in So thin that life looks through and will break out.
The people fear me, for they do observe Unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature. The seasons change their manners, as the year Had found some months asleep and leapt them over.
The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between, And the old folk, time’s doting chronicles, Say it did so a little time before That our great-grandsire, Edward, sicked and died.
Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This apoplexy will certain be his end.
I pray you, take me up and bear me hence Into some other chamber. Softly, pray.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends, Unless some dull and favorable hand Will whisper music to my weary spirit.
Call for the music in the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
Less noise, less noise.
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
How now! Rain within doors, and none abroad? How doth the King?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Exceeding ill.
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.
He altered much upon the hearing it.
If he be sick with joy, he’ll recover without physic.
Not so much noise, my lords.—Sweet Prince, speak low. The King your father is disposed to sleep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us withdraw into the other room.
Will ’t please your Grace to go along with us?
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow, Being so troublesome a bedfellow? O polished perturbation, goldencare, That keep’st the ports of slumber open wide To many a watchful night! sleep with it now; Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet As he whose brow with homely biggen bound Snores out the watch of night. O majesty, When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit Like a rich armor worn in heat of day, That scald’st withsafety. By his gates of breath There lies a downy feather which stirs not; Did he suspire, that light and weightless down Perforce must move. My gracious lord, myfather, This sleep is sound indeed. This is a sleep That from this golden rigol hath divorced So many Englishkings. Thy due from me Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood, Which nature, love, and filial tenderness Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously. My due from thee is this imperial crown, Which, as immediate as thy place and blood, Derives itself to me. [he puts the crown on his head] Lo, where it sits, Which God shallguard. And put the world’s whole strength Into one giant arm, it shall not force This lineal honor from me. This from thee Will I to mine leave, as ’tis left to me.
[waking] Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doth the King call?
What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege, Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales? Where is he? Let me see him. He isnot here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This door is open. He is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we stayed.
Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
The Prince hath ta'en it hence. Go seek him out. Is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my death? Find him, my Lord of Warwick. Chide him hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This part of his conjoins with my disease And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are, How quickly nature falls into revolt When gold becomes her object! For this the foolish overcareful fathers Have broke theirsleep with thoughts, Their brains with care, their bones with industry. For this they have engrossèd and piled up The canker’d heaps of strange-achievèd gold. For this they have been thoughtful to invest Their sons with arts and martial exercise s— When, like the bee, tolling from every flower The virtuous sweets, Our thighs packed with wax, our mouths with honey, We bring it to the hive and, like the bees, Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste Yield his engrossments to the ending father.
Now, where is he that will not stay so long Till his friend sickness hath determined me?
My lord, I found the Prince in the next room, Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks, With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood, Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife With gentle eyedrops. He is coming hither.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
Lo where he comes.—Come hither to me, Harry.— Depart the chamber. Leave us here alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought. I stay toolong by thee; I weary thee. Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honors Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth, Thouseek’st the greatness that will overwhelm thee. Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity Is held from falling with so weak a wind That it will quickly drop. My day is dim. Thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours Were thine without offense, and at my death Thou hast sealed up my expectation. Thy life did manifestthou loved’st me not, And thou wilt have me die assuredof it. Thou hid’st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts, Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart To stab at half an hour of my life. What, canst thou not forbear mehalf an hour? Then get thee gone and dig my grave thyself, And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear That thou art crownèd, not that I am dead. Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse Be drops of balm to sanctifythy head; Only compound me with forgotten dust. Give that which gave thee life unto the worms. Pluck down my officers, break my decrees, For now a time is come to mock at form. Harry the Fifth is crowned. Up, vanity, Down, royal state, all you sage counsillors, hence, And to the English court assemble now, From every region, apes of idleness. Now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum. Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit The oldest sins the newest kind of ways? Be happy, he will trouble you no more. England shall double gild his treble guilt. England shall give him office, honor, might, For the fifth Harry from curbed license plucks The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog Shall flesh histooth on every innocent. O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! When that my care could not withhold thy riots, What wilt thou do when riot is thy care? O, thou wilt be a wilderness again, Peopled with wolves, thy oldinhabitants.
O pardon me, my liege! But for my tears, The moist impediments unto my speech, I had forestalled this dear and deep rebuke Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard The course of it so far. There is your crown, And He that wears the crown immortally Long guard it yours. If I affect it more Than as your honor and as your renown, Let me no more from this obedience rise, Which my most inward true and duteous spirit Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending. God witness with me, when I here came in And found no course of breath withinyour Majesty, How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign, O, let me in my present wildness die And never live to show th' incredulous world The noble change thatI have purposèd. Coming to look on you, thinking you dead, And dead almost, my liege, to think you were, I spake unto this crown as having sense, And thus upbraided it: “The care on thee depending Hath fed upon the body of my father; Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold. Other, less fine in carat, is more precious, Preserving life in med'cine potable; But thou,most fine, most honored, most renowned, Hast eat thy bearer up.” Thus, my most royal liege, Accusing it, I put it on my head To try with it, as with an enemy That had before my face murdered my father, The quarrel of a true inheritor. But if it did infect my blood with joy Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride, If any rebelor vain spirit of mine Did with the least affection of a welcome Give entertainment to the might of it, Let Godforever keep it from my head And make me as the poorestvassal is That doth with awe and terror kneel to it.
O my son, God put it in thy mind to take it hence That thou mightst win the more thy father’s love, Pleading sowisely in excuse of it. Come hither, Harry, sit thou bymy bed And hear, I think, the very latest counsel That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son, By what bypathsand indirect crook’d ways I met this crown, and I myself know well How troublesome it sat upon my head. Tothee it shall descend with better quiet, Better opinion, better confirmation, For all the soil of the achievement goes With me into the earth. It seemed in me But as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand, And I had many living to upbraid My gain of it by their assistances, Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed, Wounding supposèd peace. All these bold fears Thou see’st with peril I have answerèd, For all my reign hath been but as a scene Acting that argument. Andnow my death Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort. So thouthe garland wear’st successively. Yet though thou stand’st more sure than I could do, Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green, And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends, Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out, By whose fell working I was first advanced And by whose power I well might lodge a fear To be again displaced; which to avoid, I cut them off and had a purpose now To lead out many to the Holy Land, Lest rest and lying still might make them look Toonear unto my state. Therefore, my Harry, Be it thy course to busy giddy minds With foreign quarrels; that action, hence borne out, May waste the memory of the former days. More would I, but my lungs are wasted so That strength of speech is utterly denied me. How I came by the crown, O God forgive, And grant it may with thee in true peace live.
My gracious liege, You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me. Then plain and right must my possession be, WhichI with more than with a common pain 'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father.
Thou bring’st me happiness and peace, son John, But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown From this bare withered trunk. Upon thy sight My worldly business makes a period. Where is my Lord of Warwick?
My Lord of Warwick.
Doth any name particular belong Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.
Laud be to God! Even there my life must end. It hath been prophesied to me many years, I should not die but in Jerusalem, Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land. Butbear me to that chamber; there I’ll lie. In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.—What,Davy, I say!
You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you. You shall not be excused. Excuses shall not be admitted. There is no excuse shall serve. You shall not be excused. —Why, Davy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, sir.
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see. Yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither. —Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served. And again, sir, shall we sow the hade land with wheat?
With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook, are there no young pigeons?
Yes, sir. Here is now the smith’s note for shoeing and plow irons.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let it be cast and paid.—Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had. And, sir, do you mean to stop any of William’s wages about the sack he lost the other day at Hinckley Fair?
He shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple of short- legged hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William cook.
Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
Yea, Davy. I will use him well. A friend i' th' court is better than a penny in purse. Use his men well, Davy,for they are arrant knaves and will backbite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No worse than they are back-bitten, sir, for they have marvellous foul linen.
Well-conceited, Davy. About thy business, Davy.
I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor of Woncot against Clement Perkes o' th' hill.
There is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor. That Visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.
I grant your Worship that he is a knave, sir, but yet, God forbid, sir, but a knave should have some countenance at his friend’s request. An honest man, sir,is able to speak for himself when a knave is not. I have served your Worship truly, sir, this eight years; an if I cannot once or twice in a quarter bear out a knave against an honest man, I have a very little creditwith your Worship. The knave is mine honest friend, sir; therefore I beseech you let him be countenanced.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, I say he shall have no wrong. Look about, Davy.
Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off with your boots.—Give me your hand, Master Bardolph.
I am glad to see your Worship.
I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph, [to the PAGE] and welcome, my tall fellow.—Come, Sir John.
I’ll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bardolph, look to our horses.
If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as Master Shallow.It is a wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men’s spirits and his. They, by observing of him,do bear themselves like foolish justices; he, by conversing with them, is turned into a justice-like servingman. Their spirits are so married in conjunction with the participation of society that they flock together in consent like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to Master Shallow, I would humor his men with the imputation of being near their master;if to his men, I would curry with Master Shallow that no man could bettercommand his servants. It is certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take diseases, one of another. Therefore let men take heed oftheir company. I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow to keep Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six fashions, which is four terms, or twoactions, and a' shall laugh without intervallums. O, itis much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with asad brow will do with a fellow that never had the ache in his shoulders. O, you shall see him laugh till his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.
[within] Sir John.
I come, Master Shallow; I come, Master Shallow.
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How doth the King?
Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.
I hope, not dead.
He’s walked the way of nature, And to our purposes he lives no more.
I would his Majesty had called me with him. The servicethat I truly did his life Hath left me open to all injuries.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, I think the young King loves you not.
I know he doth not, and do arm myself To welcome the condition of the time, Which cannot look more hideously upon me Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry. O, that the living Harry had the temper Of he the worst of these three gentlemen! How many nobles then should hold their places That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
O God, I fear all will be overturned.
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, cousin.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.
We do remember, but our argument Is all too heavy to admit much talk.
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed, And I dare swear you borrow not that face Of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find, You stand in coldest expectation. I am the sorrier; would ’twere otherwise.
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair, Which swims against your stream of quality.
Sweet princes, what I did I did in honor, Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul; And never shall you see that I will beg A ragged and forestalled remission. If truth and upright innocency fail me, I’ll to the King mymaster that is dead And tell him who hath sent me afterhim.
Here comes the Prince.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, and God save your Majesty.
This new and gorgeous garment majesty Sits not so easy on me as you think. — Brothers, you mix your sadness withsome fear. This is the English, not the Turkish court; Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds, But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers, For, by my faith, it very well becomes you. Sorrow so royally in you appears That I will deeply put the fashion on And wear it in my heart. Why then, be sad. But entertain no more of it, good brothers, Than a joint burden laid upon us all. For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured, I’ll be your father andyour brother too. Let me but bear your love, I ’ll bearyour cares. Yet weep that Harry’s dead, and so will I, But Harry lives that shall convert those tears By number into hours of happiness.
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.
You all look strangely on me. [to the CHIEF JUSTICE] And you most. You are, I think, assured I love you not.
I am assured, if I be measured rightly, Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No? How might a prince of my great hopes forget So great indignities you laid upon me? What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison Th' immediate heir of England? Was this easy? May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?
I then did use the person of your father; The image of his power lay then in me. And in th' administration of his law, Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth, Your Highness pleasèd to forget my place, The majesty and power of law and justice, The image of the King whom I presented, And struck me in my very seat of judgment, Whereon, as an offender to your father, I gave bold way to my authority And did commit you. If the deed were ill, Be you contented, wearing now the garland, To have a son set your decrees at nought? To pluck down justice from your awful bench? To trip the course of law and blunt the sword That guards the peace and safety of yourperson? Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image Andmock your workings in a second body? Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours; Be now the father and propose a son, Hear your own dignity so much profaned, See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted, Behold yourself so by a son disdained, And then imagine me taking your part And in your power soft silencing your son. After this cold considerance, sentence me, And, as you are a king, speak in your state What I have done that misbecame my place, My person, ormy liege’s sovereignty.
You are right, justice, and you weigh this well. Therefore still bear the balance and the sword. And I do wish your honors may increase Till you do live to see a son of mine Offend you and obey you as I did. So shall Ilive to speak my father’s words: “Happy am I that have a man so bold That dares do justice on my proper son; And not less happy, having such a son That would deliver up his greatness so Into the hands of justice.” You did commit me, For which I do commit into your hand Th' unstainèd sword that you have used to bear, With this remembrance: that you use the same With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand. You shall be as a father to my youth, My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear, And I will stoop and humble my intents To your well-practiced wise directions. — And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you: My father is gone wild into his grave, For in his tomb lie my affections, And with his spirit sadlyI survive To mock the expectation of the world, To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down After my seeming. The tide of blood in me Hath proudly flowed in vanity till now. Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea, Where it shall mingle with the state of floods And flow henceforth in formal majesty. Now call we our high court of parliament, And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel That the great body of our state may go In equalrank with the best governed nation; That war, or peace,or both at once, may be As things acquainted and familiar to us, In which you, father, shall have foremost hand. Our coronation done, we will accite, As Ibefore remembered, all our state. And, God consigning to my good intents, No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say God shorten Harry’s happy life one day.
Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbor, we will eat a last year’s pippin of my own graffing, with adish of caraways, and so forth. —Come, cousin Silence. —And then to bed.
Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling and a rich.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all, Sir John. Marry, good air. —Spread, Davy, spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.
This Davy serves you for good uses. He is your servingman and your husband.
A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir John. By the Mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper.A good varlet. Now sit down, now sit down.—Come, cousin.
Ah, sirrah, quoth he, we shall Do nothing but eat and make good cheer, [sings] And praise God for the merry year, When flesh is cheap and females dear, And lusty lads roam here and there So merrily, And ever among so merrily.
There’s a merry heart!—Good Master Silence, I’ll give you a health for that anon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.
Sweet sir, sit. I’ll be with you anon. Most sweet sir, sit. Master page, good master page, sit. Proface. What you want in meat, we’ll have in drink, but you must bear. The heart’s all.
Be merry, Master Bardolph. —And, my little soldier there, be merry.
[sings] Be merry, be merry, my wife has all, For women are shrews, both short and tall. 'Tis merry in hall whenbeards wag all, And welcome merry Shrovetide. Be merry,be merry.
I did not think Master Silence had been a man of this mettle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.
[To BARDOLPH] There’s a dish of leather-coats for you.
Davy!
Your Worship, I’ll be with you straight.— [to BARDOLPH] A cup of wine, sir?
[sings] A cup of wine that’s brisk and fine, And drink unto thee, leman mine, And a merry heart lives long-a.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well said, Master Silence.
And we shall be merry; now comes in the sweet o' th' night.
Health and long life to you, Master Silence.
[sings] Fill the cup, and let it come, I’ll pledge you a mile to th' bottom.
Honest Bardolph, welcome. If thou wantest anything and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. — [to the PAGE] Welcome, my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed too. I’ll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the cabileros about London.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hope to see London once ere I die.
And I might see you there, Davy!
By the Mass, you’ll crack a quart together, ha, will you not, Master Bardolph?
Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.
By God’s liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick bythee, I can assure thee that. He will not out, he. 'Tistrue bred!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I’ll stick by him, sir.
Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing, be merry. [One knocks at door.] Look who’s at door there, ho. Who knocks?
[to SILENCE] Why, now you have done me right.
[sings] Do me right, And dub me knight, Samingo. Is ’t not so?
'Tis so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is ’t so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.
An ’t please your Worship, there’s one Pistol come fromthe court with news.
From the court? Let him come in.
How now, Pistol?
Sir John, God save you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wind blew you hither, Pistol?
Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.
By 'r Lady, I think he be, but Goodman Puff of Barson.
Puff? Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!— Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend, And helter-skelter have I rode to thee, And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys, And golden times, and happy news of price.
I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A foutre for the world and worldlings base! I speak of Africa and golden joys.
O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news? Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.
[sings] And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons, And shall good news be baffled? Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, lament therefor.
Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from the court, I take it there’s but two ways, either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am, sir, under the King in some authority.
Under which king, besonian? Speak or die.
Under King Harry.
Harry the Fourth, or Fifth?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Harry the Fourth.
A foutre for thine office!— Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king. Harry the Fifth’s the man. I speak the truth. When Pistol lies, do this [he makes an obscene gesture] and fig me, like The bragging Spaniard.
What, is the old king dead?
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.
Away, Bardolph.—Saddle my horse.—Master Robert Shallow,choose what office thou wilt in the land, ’tis thine. Pistol, I will double-charge thee with dignities.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O joyful day! I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.
What, I do bring good news!
Carry Master Silence to bed.—Master Shallow, my Lord Shallow, be what thou wilt. I am Fortune’s steward. Get on thy boots. We’ll ride all night.—O sweet Pistol!—Away, Bardolph!
Come, Pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something to do thyself good. Boot, boot, Master Shallow. I know the young King is sick for me. Let us take any man’s horses. The laws of England are at my commandment. Blessed are they that have been my friends,and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also! “Where is the life that late I led?” say they. Why, here it is. Welcome these pleasant days.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I might die,that I might have thee hanged. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.
The Constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall have whipping cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been a man or two lately killed about her.
Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I ’ll tell thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-faced villain.
O the Lord, that Sir John were come! I would make this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb might miscarry.
If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; youhave but eleven now. Come, I charge you both go with me, for the man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongstyou.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. If you be not swinged, I’ll forswear half-kirtles.
Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.
O God, that right should thus overcome might! Well, of sufferance comes ease.
Come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.
Ay, come, you starved bloodhound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Goodman Death, Goodman Bones!
Thou atomy, thou!
Come, you thin thing, come, you rascal.
Very well.
More rushes, more rushes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The trumpets have sounded twice.
'Twill be two o'clock ere they come from the coronation. Dispatch, dispatch.
Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow. I will make the King do you grace. I will leer upon him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.
God bless thy lungs, good knight!
Come here, Pistol, stand behind me. — [to SHALLOW ] O, if I had had time to have made new liveries, I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But ’tis no matter. This poor show doth better. This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It doth so.
It shows my earnestness of affection—
It doth so.
My devotion—
It doth, it doth, it doth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As it were, to ride day and night, and not to deliberate, not to remember, not to have patience to shift me—
It is best, certain.
But to stand stained with travel and sweating with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting allaffairs else in oblivion, as if there were nothing elseto be done but to see him.
'Tis semper idem , for obsque hoc nihil est ; ’tis all inevery part.
'Tis so indeed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and make thee rage. Thy Doll and Helen of thy noble thoughts is in base durance and contagious prison, Haled thither by most mechanical and dirty hand. Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto’s snake, for Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.
I will deliver her.
There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal.
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save thee, my sweet boy!
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.
[to FALSTAFF] Have you your wits? Know you what ’tis to speak?
My King, my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart!
I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers. How ill white hairs become a fool and jester. I have long dreamtof such a kind of man, So surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane; But being awaked, I do despise my dream. Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace; Leave gormandizing. Know the grave doth gape For thee thrice wider than for other men. Reply not to me with a fool-born jest. Presume not that I am the thing I was, For God doth know—so shall the world perceive— That I have turned away my former self. So will I those that kept me company. When thou dost hear I am as I have been, Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast, The tutor and the feeder of my riots. Till then I banish thee, on pain of death, As I have done the rest of my misleaders, Not to come near our person by ten mile. Forcompetence of life I will allow you, That lack of meansenforce you not to evils. And, as we hear you do reformyourselves, We will, according to your strengths and qualities, Give you advancement. [to CHIEF JUSTICE ] Beit your charge, my lord, To see performed the tenor of my word.— [To the attendants] Set on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.
Yea, marry, Sir John, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.
That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not you grieve at this. I shall be sent for in private to him. Look you, he must seem thus to the world. Fear not your advancements. I will be the man yet that shall make you great.
I cannot well perceive how, unless you should give me your doublet and stuff me out with straw. I beseech you,good Sir John, let me have five hundred of my thousand.
Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard was but a color.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A color that I fear you will die in, Sir John.
Fear no colors. Go with me to dinner.—Come, Lieutenant Pistol.—Come, Bardolph.—I shall be sent for soon at night.
Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet. Take all his company along with him.
My lord, my lord—
I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.— Take them away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Si fortune me tormenta, spero me contenta.
I like this fair proceeding of the King’s. He hath intent his wonted followers Shall all be very well provided for, But all are banished till their conversations Appear more wise and modest to the world.
And so they are.
The King hath called his parliament, my lord.
He hath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will lay odds that, ere this year expire, We bear ourcivil swords and native fire As far as France: I beard a bird so sing, Whose music, to my thinking, pleased theKing. Come, will you hence?
First my fear; then my curtsy, last my speech. My fear is your displeasure my curtsy my duty; and my speech, to beg your pardons. If you look for a good speech now, you undo me, for what I have to say is of mine own making, and what indeed I should say will, I doubt, prove mine own marring. But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end of a displeasing play to pray your patience for it and to promise you a better. I meant indeed to payyou with this, which, if like an ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle creditors, lose. Here I promised you I would be, and here I commit my body to your mercies. Bate me some, and I will pay yousome, and, as most debtors do, promise you infinitely. And so I kneel down before you, but, indeed, to pray for the Queen. If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my legs? And yet that were butlight payment, to dance out of your debt. But a good conscience will make any possible satisfaction, and so would I. All the gentlewomen here have forgiven me; if the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in suchan assembly. One word more, I beseech you: if you be nottoo much cloyed with fat meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France , where, for anything I know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already he be killed with your hard opinions; for Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the man. My tongue is weary; whenmy legs are too, I will bid you good night.
Oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend The brightest heaven of invention! A kingdom for a stage, princes to act, And monarchs to behold the swelling scene! Then should the warlike Harry, like himself, Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels, Leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all, The flat unraisèd spirits that hath dared On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth So great an object. Can this cockpit hold The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram Within this wooden O the very casques That did affright the air at Agincourt? O pardon, since a crookèd figure may Attest in little place a million, And let us, ciphers to this great account, On your imaginary forces work. Suppose within the girdle of these walls Are now confined two mighty monarchies Whose high uprearèd and abutting fronts The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts. Into a thousand parts divide one man, And make imaginary puissance. Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth, For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times, Turning th' accomplishment of many years Into an hour-glass; for the which supply, Admit me chorus to this history; Who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray Gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.
My lord, I’ll tell you that self bill is urged Which in th' eleventh year of the last king’s reign Was like, and had indeed against us passed But that the scambling and unquiet time Did push it out of farther question.
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be thought on. If it pass against us, We lose the better half of our possession, For all the temporal lands which men devout By testament have given to the Church Would they strip from us, being valued thus: “As much as would maintain, to the King’s honor, Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, Six thousand and two hundred good esquires; And, to relief of lazars and weak age Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, A hundred almshouses right well supplied; And to the coffers of the King besides, A thousand pounds by th' year.” Thus runs the bill.
This would drink deep.
'Twould drink the cup and all.
But what prevention?
The king is full of grace and fair regard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And a true lover of the holy Church.
The courses of his youth promised it not. The breath no sooner left his father’s body But that his wildness, mortified in him, Seemed to die too. Yea, at that very moment Consideration like an angel came And whipped th' offending Adam out of him, Leaving his body as a paradise T' envelop and contain celestial spirits. Never was such a sudden scholar made, Never came reformation in a flood With such a heady currance scouring faults, Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness So soon did lose his seat, and all at once, As in this king.
We are blessèd in the change.
Hear him but reason in divinity And, all-admiring, with an inward wish, You would desire the King were made a prelate. Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, You would say it hath been all in all his study. List his discourse of war, and you shall hear A fearful battle rendered you in music. Turn him to any cause of policy, The Gordian knot of it he will unloose Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks, The air, a chartered libertine, is still, And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences; So that the art and practic part of life Must be the mistress to this theoric; Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it, Since his addiction was to courses vain, His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow, His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports, And never noted in him any study, Any retirement, any sequestration From open haunts and popularity.
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle, And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best Neighbored by fruit of baser quality; And so the Prince obscured his contemplation Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt, Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, Unseen yet crescive in his faculty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be so, for miracles are ceased, And therefore we must needs admit the means How things are perfected.
But, my good lord, How now for mitigation of this bill Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty Incline to it or no?
He seems indifferent, Or rather swaying more upon our part Than cherishing th' exhibitors against us; For I have made an offer to his Majesty— Upon our spiritual convocation And in regard of causes now in hand, Which I have opened to his Grace at large, As touching France— to give a greater sum Than ever at one time the clergy yet Did to his predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?
With good acceptance of his Majesty— Save that there was not time enough to hear, As I perceived his Grace would fain have done, The severals and unhidden passages Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, And generally to the crown and seat of France, Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What was th' impediment that broke this off?
The French ambassador upon that instant Craved audience. And the hour, I think, is come To give him hearing. Is it four o'clock?
It is.
Then go we in to know his embassy, Which I could with a ready guess declare Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury?
Not here in presence.
Send for him, good uncle.
Shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,Before we hear him, of some things of weightThat task our thoughts concerning us and France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God and his angels guard your sacred throneAnd make you long become it.
Sure we thank you. My learnèd lord, we pray you to proceed And justly and religiously unfold Why the law Salic that they have in France Or should or should not bar us in our claim. And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord, That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading, Or nicely charge your understanding soul With opening titles miscreate, whose right Suits not in native colors with the truth; For God doth know how many now in health Shall drop their blood in approbation Of what your reverence shall incite us to. Therefore take heed how you impawn our person, How you awake our sleeping sword of war. We charge you in the name of God, take heed, For never two such kingdoms did contend Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops Are every one a woe, a sore complaint 'Gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords That make such waste in brief mortality. Under this conjuration, speak, my lord, For we will hear, note, and believe in heart That what you speak is in your conscience washed As pure as sin with baptism.
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers That owe yourselves, your lives, and services To this imperial throne. There is no bar To make against your Highness' claim to France But this, which they produce from Pharamond: “In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant” (No woman shall succeed in Salic land), Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze To be the realm of France, and Pharamond The founder of this law and female bar. Yet their own authors faithfully affirm That the land Salic is in Germany, Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe, Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons, There left behind and settled certain French, Who, holding in disdain the German women For some dishonest manners of their life, Established then this law: to wit, no female Should be inheritrix in Salic land, Which “Salic,” as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala Is at this day in Germany called Meissen. Then doth it well appear the Salic law Was not devisèd for the realm of France, Nor did the French possess the Salic land Until four hundred one and twenty years After defunction of King Pharamond, Idly supposed the founder of this law; Who died within the year of our redemption Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great Subdued the Saxons and did seat the French Beyond the river Sala in the year Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say, King Pepin, which deposèd Childeric, Did, as heir general, being descended Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair, Make claim and title to the crown of France. Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown Of Charles the duke of Lorraine, sole heir male Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great, To find his title with some shows of truth, Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught, Conveyed himself as th' heir to th' Lady Lingare, Daughter to Charlemagne, who was the son To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth, Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet, Could not keep quiet in his conscience, Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother, Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare, Daughter to Charles the foresaid duke of Lorraine, By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great Was reunited to the crown of France. So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun, King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim, King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear To hold in right and title of the female. So do the kings of France unto this day, Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law To bar your Highness claiming from the female And rather choose to hide them in a net Than amply to imbar their crooked titles Usurped from you and your progenitors.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign, For in the Book of Numbers is it writ: “When the man dies, let the inheritance Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord, Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag, Look back into your mighty ancestors. Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb, From whom you claim. Invoke his warlike spirit And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince, Who on the French ground played a tragedy, Making defeat on the full power of France Whiles his most mighty father on a hill Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp Forage in blood of French nobility. O noble English, that could entertain With half their forces the full pride of France And let another half stand laughing by, All out of work and cold for action!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Awake remembrance of these valiant dead And with your puissant arm renew their feats. You are their heir, you sit upon their throne, The blood and courage that renownèd them Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege Is in the very May-morn of his youth, Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth Do all expect that you should rouse yourself As did the former lions of your blood.
They know your Grace hath cause and means and might; So hath your Highness. Never king of England Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects, Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England And lie pavilioned in the fields of France.
Oh, let their bodies follow, my dear liege, With blood and sword and fire to win your right, In aid whereof we of the spiritualty Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum As never did the clergy at one time Bring in to any of your ancestors.
We must not only arm t' invade the French, But lay down our proportions to defend Against the Scot, who will make road upon us With all advantages.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They of those marches, gracious sovereign, Shall be a wall sufficient to defend Our inland from the pilfering borderers.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only, But fear the main intendment of the Scot, Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us. For you shall read that my great-grandfather Never went with his forces into France But that the Scot on his unfurnished kingdom Came pouring like the tide into a breach With ample and brim fullness of his force, Galling the gleanèd land with hot assays, Girding with grievous siege castles and towns, That England, being empty of defense, Hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood.
She hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege, For hear her but exampled by herself: When all her chivalry hath been in France And she a mourning widow of her nobles, She hath herself not only well defended But taken and impounded as a stray The king of Scots, whom she did send to France To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings And make her chronicle as rich with praise As is the ooze and bottom of the sea With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.
But there’s a saying very old and true: “If that you will France win, Then with Scotland first begin.” For once the eagle England being in prey, To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs, Playing the mouse in absence of the cat, To ’tame and havoc more than she can eat.
It follows, then, the cat must stay at home. Yet that is but a crushed necessity, Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. While that the armèd hand doth fight abroad, Th' advisèd head defends itself at home. For government, though high and low and lower, Put into parts, doth keep in one consent, Congreeing in a full and natural close, Like music.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Therefore doth heaven divide The state of man in diverse functions, Setting endeavor in continual motion, To which is fixèd as an aim or butt Obedience; for so work the honeybees, Creatures that by a rule in nature teach The act of order to a peopled kingdom. They have a king and officers of sorts, Where some like magistrates correct at home, Others like merchants venture trade abroad, Others like soldiers armèd in their stings Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds, Which pillage they with merry march bring home To the tent royal of their emperor, Who, busied in his majesty, surveys The singing masons building roofs of gold, The civil citizens kneading up the honey, The poor mechanic porters crowding in Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate, The sad-eyed justice with his surly hum Delivering o'er to executors pale The lazy yawning drone. I this infer: That many things, having full reference To one consent, may work contrariously, As many arrows loosèd several ways Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town, As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea, As many lines close in the dial’s center, So may a thousand actions, once afoot, End in one purpose, and be all well borne Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege! Divide your happy England into four, Whereof take you one quarter into France, And you withal shall make all Gallia shake. If we, with thrice such powers left at home, Cannot defend our own doors from the dog, Let us be worried, and our nation lose The name of hardiness and policy.
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
Now are we well resolved, and by God’s help And yours, the noble sinews of our power, France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit, Ruling in large and ample empery O'er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms, Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn, Tombless, with no remembrance over them. Either our history shall with full mouth Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave, Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth, Not worshipped with a waxen epitaph.
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear Your greeting is from him, not from the king.
May’t please your Majesty to give us leave Freely to render what we have in charge, Or shall we sparingly show you far off The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are no tyrant, but a Christian king, Unto whose grace our passion is as subject As is our wretches fettered in our prisons. Therefore with frank and with uncurbèd plainness Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.
Thus, then, in few: Your Highness, lately sending into France, Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third; In answer of which claim, the prince our master Says that you savor too much of your youth And bids you be advised there’s naught in France That can be with a nimble galliard won. You cannot revel into dukedoms there. He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit, This tun of treasure, and, in lieu of this, Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.
What treasure, uncle?
Tennis balls, my liege.
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us. His present and your pains we thank you for. When we have matched our rackets to these balls, We will in France, by God’s grace, play a set Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard. Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler That all the courts of France will be disturbed With chases. And we understand him well, How he comes o'er us with our wilder days, Not measuring what use we made of them. We never valued this poor seat of England And therefore, living hence, did give ourself To barbarous license, as ’tis ever common That men are merriest when they are from home. But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state, Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness When I do rouse me in my throne of France, For that I have laid by my majesty And plodded like a man for working days. But I will rise there with so full a glory That I will dazzle all the eyes of France, Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us. And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his Hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul Shall stand sore chargèd for the wasteful vengeance That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands, Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down, And some are yet ungotten and unborn That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn. But this lies all within the will of God, To whom I do appeal, and in whose name Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on, To venge me as I may and to put forth My rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause. So get you hence in peace. And tell the Dauphin His jest will savor but of shallow wit When thousands weep more than did laugh at it. —Convey them with safe conduct.— Fare you well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was a merry message.
We hope to make the sender blush at it. Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour That may give furth'rance to our expedition; For we have now no thought in us but France, Save those to God, that run before our business. Therefore let our proportions for these wars Be soon collected, and all things thought upon That may with reasonable swiftness add More feathers to our wings. For, God before, We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door. Therefore let every man now task his thought, That this fair action may on foot be brought.
Now all the youth of England are on fire, And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. Now thrive the armorers, and honor’s thought Reigns solely in the breast of every man. They sell the pasture now to buy the horse, Following the mirror of all Christian kings With wingèd heels, as English Mercurys. For now sits Expectation in the air And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets Promised to Harry and his followers. The French, advised by good intelligence Of this most dreadful preparation, Shake in their fear, and with pale policy Seek to divert the English purposes. O England, model to thy inward greatness, Like little body with a mighty heart, What might’st thou do, that honor would thee do, Were all thy children kind and natural! But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out, A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men— One, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, and the second, Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third, Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland— Have, for the gilt of France (Oh, guilt indeed!), Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France, And by their hands this grace of kings must die, If hell and treason hold their promises, Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton. Linger your patience on, and we’ll digest Th' abuse of distance, force a play. The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed, The king is set from London, and the scene Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton. There is the playhouse now, there must you sit, And thence to France shall we convey you safe And bring you back, charming the narrow seas To give you gentle pass; for, if we may, We’ll not offend one stomach with our play. But, till the king come forth, and not till then, Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.
Well met, Corporal Nym.
Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
For my part, I care not. I say little, but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be asit may. I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though? It will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man’s sword will, and there’s an end.
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we’ll be all three sworn brothers to France. Let ’t be so, good Corporal Nym.
Faith, I will live so long as I may, that’s the certainof it. And when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my rest; that is the rendezvous of it.
It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say knives have edges. It must be asit may. Though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I cannot tell.
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good corporal, be patient here.—How now, mine host Pistol?
Base tyke, call’st thou me host?Now, by this hand, I swear, I scorn the term,Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.
No, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestlyby the prick of their needles but it will be thought wekeep a bawdy house straight.
Oh, well-a-day, Lady! If he be not hewn now, we shall see willful adultery and murder committed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good lieutenant, good corporal, offer nothing here.
Pish!
Pish for thee, Iceland dog,Thou prick-eared cur of Iceland!
Good Corporal Nym, show thy valor and put up your sword.
Will you shog off? [ to PISTOL] I would have you solus .
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“Solus,” egregious dog? O viper vile, The solus in thy most marvelous face, The solus in thy teeth and in thy throat And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy, And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth! I do retort the solus in thy bowels, For I can take, and Pistol’s cock is up, And flashing fire will follow.
I am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me. I have an humor to knock you indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would prickyour guts a little in good terms, as I may, and that’s the humor of it.
O braggart vile and damnèd furious wight,The grave doth gape, and doting death is near.Therefore exhale.
Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first stroke,I’ll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier. [ draws]
An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.Give me thy fist, thy forefoot to me give.Thy spirits are most tall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humor of it.
Couple à gorge , that is the word. I defy thee again. O hound of Crete, think’st thou my spouse to get? No, to the spital go, And from the powd'ring tub of infamy Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid’s kind, Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse. I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly For the only she, And— pauca— there’s enough. Go to.
Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master and your hostess. He is very sick and would to bed.— Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he’s very ill.
Away, you rogue!
By my troth, he’ll yield the crow a pudding one of these days. The king has killed his heart. Good husband,come home presently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to France together. Why the devil should we keep knives to cut oneanother’s throats?
Let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!
You’ll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?
Base is the slave that pays.
That now I will have—that’s the humor of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As manhood shall compound. Push home.
By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I’ll kill him. By this sword, I will.
“Sword” is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. Prithee,put up.
A noble shalt thou have, and present pay, And liquor likewise will I give to thee, And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood. I’ll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me. Is not this just? For I shall subtler be Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. Give me thy hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall have my noble?
In cash, most justly paid.
Well, then, that’s the humor of ’t.
As ever you come of women, come in quickly to Sir John. Ah, poor heart, he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men,come to him.
The king hath run bad humors on the knight, that’s the even of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nym, thou hast spoke the right.His heart is fracted and corroborate.
The king is a good king, but it must be as it may. He passes some humors and careers.
Let us condole the knight, for, lambkins, we will live.
'Fore God, his grace is bold to trust these traitors.
They shall be apprehended by and by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How smooth and even they do bear themselves, As if allegiance in their bosoms sat Crownèd with faith and constant loyalty.
The king hath note of all that they intend,By interception which they dream not of.
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors— That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell His sovereign’s life to death and treachery!
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. —My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham, And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts. Think you not that the powers we bear with us Will cut their passage through the force of France, Doing the execution and the act For which we have in head assembled them?
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I doubt not that, since we are well-persuaded We carry not a heart with us from hence That grows not in a fair consent with ours, Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish Success and conquest to attend on us.
Never was monarch better feared and loved Than is your Majesty. There’s not, I think, a subject That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness Under the sweet shade of your government.
True. Those that were your father’s enemies Have steeped their galls in honey, and do serve you With hearts create of duty and of zeal.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness And shall forget the office of our hand Sooner than quittance of desert and merit According to the weight and worthiness.
So service shall with steelèd sinews toil, And labor shall refresh itself with hope To do your Grace incessant services.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We judge no less.— Uncle of Exeter, Enlarge the man committed yesterday That railed against our person. We consider It was excess of wine that set him on, And on his more advice we pardon him.
That’s mercy, but too much security. Let him be punished, sovereign, lest example Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.
Oh, let us yet be merciful.
So may Your Highness, and yet punish, too.
Sir, you show great mercy if you give him lifeAfter the taste of much correction.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, your too much love and care of me Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch. If little faults proceeding on distemper Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and digested, Appear before us? We’ll yet enlarge that man, Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care And tender preservation of our person, Would have him punished. And now to our French causes. Who are the late commissioners?
I one, my lord.Your Highness bade me ask for it today.
So did you me, my liege.
And I, my royal sovereign.
Then, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, there is yours. —There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham. —And, sir knight, Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours. [gives each of them a paper] —Read them, and know I know your worthiness. —My Lord of Westmoreland and uncle Exeter, We will aboard tonight. —Why, how now, gentlemen? What see you in those papers, that you lose So much complexion? —Look you, how they change. Their cheeks are paper. —Why, what read you there That have so cowarded and chased your blood Out of appearance?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do confess my fault,And do submit me to Your Highness' mercy.
To which we all appeal.
The mercy that was quick in us but late By your own counsel is suppressed and killed. You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy, For your own reasons turn into your bosoms, As dogs upon their masters, worrying you. —See you, my princes and my noble peers, These English monsters. My Lord of Cambridge here, You know how apt our love was to accord To furnish him with all appurtenants Belonging to his honor, and this man Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired, And sworn unto the practices of France, To kill us here in Hampton; to the which This knight, no less for bounty bound to us Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. —But Oh, What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel, Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature? Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels, That knew’st the very bottom of my soul, That almost mightst have coined me into gold, Wouldst thou have practiced on me for thy use— May it be possible that foreign hire Could out of thee extract one spark of evil That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange That, though the truth of it stands off as gross As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it. Treason and murder ever kept together As two yoke-devils sworn to either’s purpose, Working so grossly in a natural cause That admiration did not whoop at them. But thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in Wonder to wait on treason and on murder, And whatsoever cunning fiend it was That wrought upon thee so preposterously Hath got the voice in hell for excellence. All other devils that suggest by treasons Do botch and bungle up damnation With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched From glist'ring semblances of piety. But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up, Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason, Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor. If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus Should with his lion gait walk the whole world, He might return to vasty Tartar back And tell the legions “I can never win A soul so easy as that Englishman’s.” Oh, how hast thou with jealousy infected The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful? Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learnèd? Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family? Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious? Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet, Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger, Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood, Garnished and decked in modest complement, Not working with the eye without the ear, And but in purgèd judgment trusting neither? Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem. And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot To mark the full-fraught man and best endued With some suspicion. I will weep for thee, For this revolt of thine methinks is like Another fall of man. —Their faults are open. Arrest them to the answer of the law, And God acquit them of their practices.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard, Earl of Cambridge. —I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham. —I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.
Our purposes God justly hath discovered, And I repent my fault more than my death, Which I beseech Your Highness to forgive, Although my body pay the price of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For me, the gold of France did not seduce, Although I did admit it as a motive The sooner to effect what I intended; But God be thankèd for prevention, Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice, Beseeching God and you to pardon me.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice At the discovery of most dangerous treason Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself, Prevented from a damnèd enterprise. My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.
God quit you in His mercy. Hear your sentence: You have conspired against our royal person, Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his coffers Received the golden earnest of our death, Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter, His princes and his peers to servitude, His subjects to oppression and contempt, And his whole kingdom into desolation. Touching our person, seek we no revenge, But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender, Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence, Poor miserable wretches, to your death, The taste whereof God of His mercy give You patience to endure, and true repentance Of all your dear offences. —Bear them hence.
Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof Shall be to you as us, like glorious. We doubt not of a fair and lucky war, Since God so graciously hath brought to light This dangerous treason lurking in our way To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now But every rub is smoothèd on our way. Then forth, dear countrymen. Let us deliver Our puissance into the hand of God, Putting it straight in expedition. Cheerly to sea. The signs of war advance. No king of England if not king of France.
Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; for my manly heart doth earn.—Bardolph, be blithe.— Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.—Boy, bristle thy courageup . For Falstaff, he is dead, and we must earn therefore.
Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell.
Nay, sure, he’s not in hell! He’s in Arthur’s bosom, ifever man went to Arthur’s bosom. He made a finer end, and went away an it had been any christom child. He parted ev'n just between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for after I saw him fumble with thesheets and play with flowers and smile upon his finger’s end, I knew there was but one way, for his nosewas as sharp as a pen, and he told of green fields. “How now, Sir John?” quoth I. “What, man, be o' good cheer!” So he cried out “God, God, God!” three or four times. Now I, to comfort him, bid him he should not think of God. I hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So he bade me lay more clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed andfelt them, and they were as cold as any stone. Then I felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and all wasas cold as any stone.
They say he cried out of sack.
Ay, that he did.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And of women.
Nay, that he did not.
Yes, that he did, and said they were devils incarnate.
'A could never abide carnation. 'Twas a color he never liked.
He said once the devil would have him about women.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He did in some sort, indeed, handle women, but then he was rheumatic, and talked of the Whore of Babylon.
Do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon Bardolph’snose, and he said it was a black soul burning in hell?
Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire. That’s all the riches I got in his service.
Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.
Come, let’s away. —My love, give me thy lips. Look to my chattels and my movables. Let senses rule. The word is “Pitch and pay.” Trust none, for oaths are straws, men’s faiths are wafer-cakes, And Holdfast is the only dog, my duck. Therefore, caveto be thy counselor. Go, clear thy crystals .—Yoke-fellows in arms, Let us to France, like horse-leeches, my boys, To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.
Farewell, hostess. [kissing her]
I cannot kiss, that is the humor of it. But adieu.
Let housewifery appear. Keep close, I thee command.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell. Adieu.
Thus comes the English with full power upon us, And more than carefully it us concerns To answer royally in our defenses. Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany, Of Brabant and of Orléans, shall make forth, And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch, To line and new-repair our towns of war With men of courage and with means defendant. For England his approaches makes as fierce As waters to the sucking of a gulf. It fits us then to be as provident As fear may teach us out of late examples Left by the fatal and neglected English Upon our fields.
To view the sick and feeble parts of France. And let us do it with no show of fear, No, with no more than if we heard that England Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance. For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged, Her scepter so fantastically borne By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth, That fear attends her not. My most redoubted father, It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe, For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom, Though war nor no known quarrel were in question, But that defenses, musters, preparations, Should be maintained, assembled, and collected, As were a war in expectation. Therefore I say ’tis meet we all go forth.
Oh peace, Prince Dauphin! You are too much mistaken in this king. Question your Grace the late ambassadors With what great state he heard their embassy, How well supplied with noble counselors, How modest in exception, and withal How terrible in constant resolution, And you shall find his vanities forespent Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus, Covering discretion with a coat of folly, As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots That shall first spring and be most delicate.
Well, ’tis not so, my Lord High Constable. But though we think it so, it is no matter. In cases of defense ’tis best to weigh The enemy more mighty than he seems. So the proportions of defense are filled, Which of a weak or niggardly projection Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting A little cloth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Think we King Harry strong, And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him. The kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us, And he is bred out of that bloody strain That haunted us in our familiar paths. Witness our too-much-memorable shame When Cressy battle fatally was struck And all our princes captived by the hand Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales, Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun, Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him Mangle the work of nature and deface The patterns that by God and by French fathers Had twenty years been made. This is a stem Of that victorious stock, and let us fear The native mightiness and fate of him.
Ambassadors from Harry King of EnglandDo crave admittance to your Majesty.
We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.
You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.
Turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten Runs far before them. Good my sovereign, Take up the English short, and let them know Of what a monarchy you are the head. Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin As self-neglecting.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From our brother England?
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty: He wills you, in the name of God Almighty, That you divest yourself and lay apart The borrowed glories that, by gift of heaven, By law of nature and of nations, 'longs To him and to his heirs —namely, the crown And all wide-stretchèd honors that pertain By custom and the ordinance of times Unto the crown of France. That you may know 'Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim Picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days, Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked, He sends you this most memorable line, In every branch truly demonstrative, Willing you overlook this pedigree, And when you find him evenly derived From his most famed of famous ancestors, Edward the Third, he bids you then resign Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held From him, the native and true challenger.
Or else what follows?
Bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it. Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming, In thunder and in earthquake like a Jove, That, if requiring fail, he will compel, And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord, Deliver up the crown and to take mercy On the poor souls for whom this hungry war Opens his vasty jaws, and on your head Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, The dead men’s blood, the pining maidens' groans, For husbands, fathers, and betrothèd lovers, That shall be swallowed in this controversy. This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message— Unless the Dauphin be in presence here, To whom expressly I bring greeting too.
For us, we will consider of this further.Tomorrow shall you bear our full intentBack to our brother England.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For the Dauphin,I stand here for him. What to him from England?
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt, And anything that may not misbecome The mighty sender, doth he prize you at. Thus says my king: an if your father’s Highness Do not, in grant of all demands at large, Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty, He’ll call you to so hot an answer of it That caves and womby vaultages of France Shall chide your trespass and return your mock In second accent of his ordinance.
Say, if my father render fair return, It is against my will, for I desire Nothing but odds with England. To that end, As matching to his youth and vanity, I did present him with the Paris balls.
He’ll make your Paris Louvre shake for it, Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe. And be assured you’ll find a difference, As we his subjects have in wonder found, Between the promise of his greener days And these he masters now. Now he weighs time Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read In your own losses, if he stay in France.
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king Come here himself to question our delay, For he is footed in this land already.
You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions. A night is but small breath and little pauseTo answer matters of this consequence.
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen The well-appointed king at Hampton pier Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning. Play with your fancies and in them behold, Upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing. Hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give To sounds confused. Behold the threaden sails, Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind, Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea, Breasting the lofty surge. Oh, do but think You stand upon the rivage and behold A city on th' inconstant billows dancing, For so appears this fleet majestical Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow! Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy And leave your England, as dead midnight still, Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women, Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance, For who is he whose chin is but enriched With one appearing hair that will not follow These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France? Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege. Behold the ordnance on their carriages, With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur. Suppose th'Ambassador from the French comes back, Tells Harry that the king doth offer him Katherine his daughter and with her, to dowry, Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms. The offer likes not, and the nimble gunner With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
And down goes all before them. Still be kind And eke out our performance with your mind.
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, Or close the wall up with our English dead! In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man As modest stillness and humility, But when the blast of war blows in our ears, Then imitate the action of the tiger: Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage, Then lend the eye a terrible aspect, Let pry through the portage of the head Like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it As fearfully as doth a gallèd rock O'erhang and jutty his confounded base, Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit To his full height. On, on, you noblest English, Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof, Fathers that, like so many Alexanders, Have in these parts from morn till even fought And sheathed their swords for lack of argument. Dishonor not your mothers. Now attest That those whom you called fathers did beget you. Be copy now to men of grosser blood, And teach them how to war. And you, good yeoman, Whose limbs were made in England, show us here The mettle of your pasture. Let us swear That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not, For there is none of you so mean and base That hath not noble luster in your eyes. I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot. Follow your spirit, and upon this charge Cry “God for Harry, England, and Saint George!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!
Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot, and,for mine own part, I have not a case of lives. The humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong of it.
“The plainsong” is most just, for humors do abound. [sings] Knocks go and come. God’s vassals drop and die, And sword and shield In bloody field Doth win immortal fame.
Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give allmy fame for a pot of ale, and safety.
And I. [sings] If wishes would prevail with me, My purpose should not fail with me, But thither would I hie.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] As duly, But not as truly, As bird doth sing on bough.
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!
Be merciful, great duke, to men of mold. Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, abate thy rage, great duke. Good bawcock, 'bate thy rage. Use lenity, sweet chuck.
These be good humors. Your Honor wins bad humors.
As young as I am, I have observed these three swashers.I am boy to them all three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be man to me. For indeed three such antics do not amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is white-livered and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out but fights not; for Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks words and keeps whole weapons; for Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the best men, and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should be thought a coward, but his few bad words are matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke any man’s head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything and call it purchase. Bardolph stole a lute case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a fire shovel. I knew by that piece of service the men would carry coals. They would have me asfamiliar with men’s pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes much against my manhood, if I should take from another’s pocket to put into mine, for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them and seek some better service. Their villainy goes against my weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines;the duke of Gloucester would speak with you.
To the mines? Tell you the duke it is not so good to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of the war. The concavitiesof it is not sufficient, for, look you, th' athversary,you may discuss unto the duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines. By Cheshu, I think he will plow up all if there is not better directions.
The duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.
It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?
I think it be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. I will verifyas much in his beard. He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy dog.
Here he comes, and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.
Captain Jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman, that iscertain, and of great expedition and knowledge in th'aunchient wars, upon my particular knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the world in the disciplinesof the pristine wars of the Romans.
I say gudday, Captain Fluellen.
Godden to your Worship, good Captain James.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Captain Macmorris, have you quit the mines?Have the pioneers given o'er?
By Chrish, la, ’tish ill done. The work ish give over. The trompet sound the retreat. By my hand I swear, and my father’s soul, the work ish ill done. It ish give over. I would have blowed up the town, so Chrish save me, la, in an hour. Oh, ’tish ill done, ’tish ill done, by my hand, ’tish ill done.
Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you voutsafeme, look you, a few disputations with you as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the war, the Roman wars? In the way of argument, look you, and friendly communication, partly to satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline, that is the point.
It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captens bath, and Isall quit you with gud leve, as I may pick occasion, that sall I, marry.
It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. The day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the king, andthe dukes. It is no time to discourse. The town is beseeched, and the trumpet call us to the breach, and wetalk and, be Chrish, do nothing, ’tis shame for us all.So God sa' me, ’tis shame to stand still. It is shame, by my hand. And there is throats to be cut and works to be done, and there ish nothing done, so Chrish sa' me, la.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves toslomber, ay’ll de gud service, or I’ll lig i' th' grundfor it, ay, or go to death. And I’ll pay ’t as valorously as I may, that sall I suerly do, that is the breff and the long. Marry, I wad full fain heard some question ’tween you tway.
Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation—
Of my nation? What ish my nation? Ish a villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal. What ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?
Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, Captain Macmorris, peradventure I shall think youdo not use me with that affability as, in discretion, you ought to use me, look you, being as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war and in the derivation of my birth and in other particularities.
I do not know you so good a man as myself. So Chrish save me, I will cut off your head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
Ah, that’s a foul fault.
The town sounds a parley.
Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you I know the disciplines of war, and there is an end.
How yet resolves the governor of the town? This is the latest parle we will admit. Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves Or, like to men proud of destruction, Defy us to our worst. For, as I am a soldier, A name that in my thoughts becomes me best, If I begin the batt'ry once again, I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur Till in her ashes she lie burièd. The gates of mercy shall be all shut up, And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart, In liberty of bloody hand, shall range With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants. What is it then to me if impious war, Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends, Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats Enlinked to waste and desolation? What is ’t to me, when you yourselves are cause, If your pure maidens fall into the hand Of hot and forcing violation? What rein can hold licentious wickedness When down the hill he holds his fierce career? We may as bootless spend our vain command Upon th' enragèd soldiers in their spoil As send precepts to the Leviathan To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur, Take pity of your town and of your people Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command, Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy. If not, why, in a moment look to see The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand Desire the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters, Your fathers taken by the silver beards And their most reverend heads dashed to the walls, Your naked infants spitted upon pikes Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry At Herod’s bloody-hunting slaughtermen. What say you? Will you yield and this avoid Or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our expectation hath this day an end. The Dauphin, whom of succors we entreated, Returns us that his powers are yet not ready To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King, We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy. Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours, For we no longer are defensible.

Alice, tu as été en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.
Un peu, madame .
Je te prie, m'enseignez. Il faut que j'apprenne à parler . Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]La main? Elle est appelée “de hand.”
“De hand.” Et les doigts?
Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les doigts? Je pense qu'ils sont appelés “de fingres”; oui, “de fingres.”
La main , “de hand”; les doigts , “de fingres.” Je pense que je suis le bon écolier. J'ai gagné deux mots d'anglais vitement. Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
Les ongles? Nous les appelons “de nails.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“De nails.” Écoutez. Dites-moi si je parle bien : “de hand, de fingres, et de nails.”
C'est bien dit, madame. Il est fort bon anglais.
Dites-moi l'anglais pour le bras.
“De arme,” madame.
Et le coude?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“D'elbow.”
“D'elbow.” Je m'en fais la répétition de tous les mots que vous m'avez appris dés à présent.
Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.
Excusez-moi, Alice. Écoutez: “de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arma, de bilbow.”
“D'elbow,” madame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ô Seigneur Dieu! Je m'en oublie; “d'elbow.” Comment appelez-vous le col?
“De nick,” madame.
“De nick.” Et le menton?
“De chin.”
“De sin.” Le col, “de nick”; le menton, “de sin.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots aussi droit que les natifs d'Angleterre.
Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grâce de Dieu, eten peu de temps.
N'avez vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?
Non, je réciterai à vous promptement: “de hand, de fingre, de nails—”
“De nails,” madame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“De nails, de arme, de ilbow.”
Sauf votre honneur, “d'elbow.”
Ainsi dis-je: “d'elbow, de nick, et de sin.” Comment appelez-vous le pied et la robe?
“Le foot,” madame, et “le count.”
“ Le foot” et “de count.” Ô Seigneur Dieu! Ils sont motsde son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et nonpour les dames d'honneur d'user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les seigneurs de France pour tout le monde. Foh! “Le foot” et “le count”! Néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois ma leçon ensemble: “d' hand,de fingre, de nails, d' arme, d'elbow, de nick, de sin,de foot, le count.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Excellent, madame!
C'est assez pour une fois: Allons-nous à dîner.
'Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.
An if he be not fought withal, my lord, Let us not live in France. Let us quit all And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
Ô Dieu vivant , shall a few sprays of us, The emptying of our fathers' luxury, Our scions, put in wild and savage stock, Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds And overlook their grafters?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards! Mort de ma vie, if they march along Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
Dieu de batailles, where have they this mettle? Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water, A drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth, Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat? And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine, Seem frosty? Oh, for honor of our land, Let us not hang like roping icicles Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields! “Poor” we may call them in their native lords.
By faith and honor, Our madams mock at us and plainly say Our mettle is bred out and they will give Their bodies to the lust of English youth To new-store France with bastard warriors.
And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos, Saying our grace is only in our heels And that we are most lofty runaways. They bid us to the English dancing schools.
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence. Let him greet England with our sharp defiance. Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged More sharper than your swords, hie to the field: Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France; You dukes of Orléans, Bourbon, and of Berri, Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy; Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont, Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Faulconbridge, Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois; High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights, For your great seats now quit you of great shames. Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur. Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon. Go down upon him—you have power enough— And in a captive chariot into Rouen Bring him our prisoner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This becomes the great! Sorry am I his numbers are so few, His soldiers sick and famished in their march , For, I am sure, when he shall see our army He’ll drop his heart into the sink of fear And for achievement offer us his ransom.
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy And let him say to England that we send To know what willing ransom he will give. —Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us. —Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all, And quickly bring us word of England’s fall.
How now, Captain Fluellen? Come you from the bridge?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.
Is the duke of Exeter safe?
The duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon, and a man that I love and honor with my soul and my heart and my duty and my life and my living and my uttermost power. He is not, God be praised and blessed, any hurt in the world, but keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There is an aunchient lieutenant there at the pridge. I think in my very conscience he isas valiant a man as Mark Antony, and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but I did see him do as gallantservice.
What do you call him?
He is called Aunchient Pistol.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know him not.
Here is the man.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favors.The duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
Ay, I praise God, and I have merited some love at his hands.
Bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart And of buxom valor, hath, by cruel Fate And giddy Fortune’s furious fickle wheel, That goddess blind That stands upon the rolling restless stone—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By your patience, Aunchient Pistol, Fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant, and mutability and variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls and rolls and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent moral.
Fortune is Bardolph’s foe and frowns on him, For he hath stolen a pax and hangèd must he be. A damnèd death! Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free, And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. But Exeter hath given the doom of death For pax of little price. Therefore go speak—the duke will hear thy voice— And let not Bardolph’s vital thread be cut With edge of penny cord and vile reproach. Speak, Captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.
Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.
Why then, rejoice therefore.
Certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at, for if, look you, he were my brother, I would desire theduke to use his good pleasure and put him to execution,for discipline ought to be used.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Die and be damned, and figo for thy friendship!
It is well.
The fig of Spain!
Very good.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. I remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll assure you, he uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall see in a summer’s day. But it is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.
Why, ’tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier. And such fellows areperfect in the great commanders' names, and they will learn you by rote where services were done —at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on. And this they con perfectly inthe phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what a beard of the general’s cut and a horrid suit of the camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to be thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or elseyou may be marvelously mistook.
I tell you what, Captain Gower. I do perceive he is notthe man that he would gladly make show to the world he is. If I find a hole in his coat, I will tell him my mind.
Hark you, the king is coming, and I must speak with himfrom the pridge.—God pless your Majesty.
How now, Fluellen, cam’st thou from the bridge?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, so please your Majesty. The duke of Exeter has verygallantly maintained the pridge. The French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th' athversary was have possession of the pridge, but he is enforced to retire, and the duke of Exeter is master of the pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the duke is a prave man.
What men have you lost, Fluellen?
The perdition of th' athversary hath been very great, reasonable great. Marry, for my part, I think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man. His face is all bubukles and whelks and knobs and flames o' fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire’s out.
We would have all such offenders so cut off, and we give express charge that in our marches through the country there be nothing compelled from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the French upbraidedor abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.
You know me by my habit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well then, I know thee. What shall I know of thee?
My master’s mind.
Unfold it.
Thus says my king: “Say thou to Harry of England, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep. Advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him we could have rebuked him at Harfleur, but that we thought not good tobruise an injury till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have digested, which, in weight to reanswer, his pettiness would bow under. For our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th' effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom toofaint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this, add defiance, and tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose condemnation is pronounced.” So far my king and master; so much my office.
What is thy name? I know thy quality.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Montjoy.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back, And tell thy king I do not seek him now But could be willing to march on to Calais Without impeachment, for, to say the sooth, Though ’tis no wisdom to confess so much Unto an enemy of craft and vantage, My people are with sickness much enfeebled, My numbers lessened, and those few I have Almost no better than so many French, Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald, I thought upon one pair of English legs Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God, That I do brag thus. This your air of France Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent. Go therefore, tell thy master: here I am. My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk, My army but a weak and sickly guard, Yet, God before, tell him we will come on Though France himself and such another neighbor Stand in our way. There’s for thy labor, Montjoy. Go bid thy master well advise himself: If we may pass, we will; if we be hindered, We shall your tawny ground with your red blood Discolor. And so, Montjoy, fare you well. The sum of all our answer is but this: We would not seek a battle as we are, Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it. So tell your master.
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.
I hope they will not come upon us now.
We are in God’s hand, brother, not in theirs. March to the bridge. It now draws toward night. Beyond the river we’ll encamp ourselves, And on tomorrow bid them march away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, I have the best armor of the world. Would it were day!
You have an excellent armor, but let my horse have his due.
It is the best horse of Europe.
Will it never be morning?
My lord of Orléans, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of horse and armor?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns. Çà ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs, lecheval volant , the Pegasus, qui a les narines de feu . When I bestride him, I soar; I am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when he touches it. The basest hornof his hoof is more musical than the pipe of Hermes.
He’s of the color of the nutmeg.
And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. He is indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is the prince of palfreys. His neigh is like the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.
No more, cousin.
Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a theme as fluent as the sea. Turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. 'Tis a subject for a sovereignto reason on, and for a sovereign’s sovereign to ride on, and for the world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him. I once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: “Wonder of nature—”
I have heard a sonnet begin so to one’s mistress.
Then did they imitate that which I composed to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your mistress bears well.
Me well—which is the prescript praise and perfection ofa good and particular mistress.
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.
So perhaps did yours.
Mine was not bridled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode, like a kern of Ireland, your French hose off and in yourstraight strossers.
You have good judgment in horsemanship.
Be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have my horse to my mistress.
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.
I tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I could make as true a boast as that if I had a sow to my mistress.
“Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au bourbier.” Thou mak’st use of anything.
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.
My Lord Constable, the armor that I saw in your tent tonight, are those stars or suns upon it?
Stars, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.
And yet my sky shall not want.
That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and ’twere more honor some were away.
Ev'n as your horse bears your praises—who would trot aswell were some of your brags dismounted.
Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? I will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English faces.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of myway. But I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the ears of the English.
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?
You must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.
'Tis midnight. I’ll go arm myself.
The Dauphin longs for morning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He longs to eat the English.
I think he will eat all he kills.
By the white hand of my lady, he’s a gallant prince.
Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doing is activity, and he will still be doing.
He never did harm that I heard of.
Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep that good name still.
I know him to be valiant.
I was told that by one that knows him better than you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s he?
Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared not who knew it.
He needs not. It is no hidden virtue in him.
By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. 'Tis a hooded valor, and when it appears, itwill bate.
Ill will never said well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will cap that proverb with “There is flattery in friendship.”
And I will take up that with “Give the devil his due.”
Well placed; there stands your friend for the devil. Have at the very eye of that proverb with “A pox of the devil.”
You are the better at proverbs, by how much “A fool’s bolt is soon shot.”
You have shot over.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis not the first time you were overshot.
My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
Who hath measured the ground?
The Lord Grandpré.
A valiant and most expert gentleman.—Would it were day!Alas, poor Harry of England! He longs not for the dawning as we do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of England to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge.
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.
That they lack, for if their heads had any intellectualarmor, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.
Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and have their heads crushed like rotten apples. You may as well say, that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffsin robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives. And then give them great meals of beefand iron and steel, they will eat like wolves and fightlike devils.
Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.
Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we about it?
It is now two o'clock. But, let me see, by tenWe shall have each a hundred Englishmen.
Now entertain conjecture of a time When creeping murmur and the poring dark Fills the wide vessel of the universe. From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night, The hum of either army stilly sounds, That the fixed sentinels almost receive The secret whispers of each other’s watch. Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames Each battle sees the other’s umbered face. Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs Piercing the night’s dull ear; and from the tents The armorers, accomplishing the knights, With busy hammers closing rivets up, Give dreadful note of preparation. The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll, And, the third hour of drowsy morning named, Proud of their numbers and secure in soul, The confident and overlusty French Do the low-rated English play at dice And chide the cripple, tardy-gaited night, Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp So tediously away. The poor condemnèd English, Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires Sit patiently and inly ruminate The morning’s danger; and their gesture sad, Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats, Presenteth them unto the gazing moon So many horrid ghosts. Oh, now, who will behold The royal captain of this ruined band Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent? Let him cry, “Praise and glory on his head!” For forth he goes and visits all his host, Bids them good morrow with a modest smile, And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen. Upon his royal face there is no note How dread an army hath enrounded him, Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color Unto the weary and all-watchèd night, But freshly looks and overbears attaint With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty, That every wretch, pining and pale before, Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks. A largess universal, like the sun, His liberal eye doth give to everyone, Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all Behold, as may unworthiness define, A little touch of Harry in the night. And so our scene must to the battle fly, Where, Oh, for pity, we shall much disgrace, With four or five most vile and ragged foils Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous, The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see, Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gloucester, ’tis true that we are in great danger. The greater therefore should our courage be. —Good morrow, brother Bedford. God almighty, There is some soul of goodness in things evil, Would men observingly distill it out. For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers, Which is both healthful and good husbandry. Besides, they are our outward consciences And preachers to us all, admonishing That we should dress us fairly for our end. Thus may we gather honey from the weed And make a moral of the devil himself.
Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham. A good soft pillow for that good white head Were better than a churlish turf of France.
Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better,Since I may say, “Now lie I like a king.”
'Tis good for men to love their present pains Upon example. So the spirit is eased. And when the mind is quickened, out of doubt, The organs, though defunct and dead before, Break up their drowsy grave and newly move, With casted slough and fresh legerity. Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both, Commend me to the princes in our camp, Do my good morrow to them, and anon Desire them all to my pavilion.
We shall, my liege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I attend your Grace?
No, my good knight. Go with my brothers to my lords of England. I and my bosom must debate awhile, And then I would no other company.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!
God-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak’st cheerfully.
Qui vous là?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A friend.
Discuss unto me: art thou officer or art thou base, common, and popular?
I am a gentleman of a company.
Trail’st thou the puissant pike?
Even so. What are you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As good a gentleman as the emperor.
Then you are a better than the king.
The king’s a bawcock, and a heart of gold, A lad of life, an imp of fame, Of parents good, of fist most valiant. I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heartstring I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy? A Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish crew?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I am a Welshman.
Know’st thou Fluellen?
Yes.
Tell him I’ll knock his leek about his pateUpon Saint Davy’s day.
Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Art thou his friend?
And his kinsman too.
The figo for thee then!
I thank you. God be with you.
My name is Pistol called.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It sorts well with your fierceness.
Captain Fluellen.
So. In the name of Jesu Christ, speak fewer. It is the greatest admiration in the universal world when the trueand aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I warrant you,that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble babble in Pompey’s camp. I warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the wars and the cares of it and the formsof it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to be otherwise.
Why, the enemy is loud. You hear him all night.
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, inyour own conscience, now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will speak lower.
I pray you and beseech you that you will.
Though it appear a little out of fashion,There is much care and valor in this Welshman.
Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?
I think it be, but we have no great cause to desire theapproach of day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see the end of it.—Who goes there?
A friend.
Under what captain serve you?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman. I pray you, what thinks he of our estate?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even as men wracked upon a sand, that look to be washedoff the next tide.
He hath not told his thought to the king?
No. Nor it is not meet he should, for, though I speak it to you, I think the king is but a man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to me. The element showsto him as it doth to me. All his senses have but human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relishas ours are. Yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.
He may show what outward courage he will, but I believe, as cold a night as ’tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck ; and so I would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the king. I think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men’s lives saved.
I dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other men’s minds. Methinks I could not die anywhere so contented asin the king’s company, his cause being just and his quarrel honorable.
That’s more than we know.
Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know enough if we know we are the king’s subjects. If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us.
But if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, “We died at such a place,” some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle, for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion of subjection.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father that sent him. Or if a servant, under his master’s command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the business of the master the author of the servant’s damnation. But this is not so. The king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant, for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services. Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to the arbitrament of swords, can try it out with all unspottedsoldiers. Some, peradventure, have on them the guilt ofpremeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is His beadle, war is His vengeance, so that here men are punished for before-breach of the king’s laws in now the king’s quarrel. Where they feared the death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they perish. Then, if they die unprovided, no more is the king guiltyof their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the which they are now visited. Every subject’s duty is the king’s, but every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of his conscience. And, dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained. And in him that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making God so free an offer, He let him outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach others how they should prepare.
'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon hisown head. The king is not to answer it.
I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet I determine to fight lustily for him.
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully, but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.
You pay him then. That’s a perilous shot out of an elder gun, that a poor and private displeasure can do against a monarch. You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a peacock’s feather. You’ll “never trust his word after.” Come, ’tisa foolish saying.
Your reproof is something too round. I should be angry with you if the time were convenient.
Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
I embrace it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How shall I know thee again?
Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my bonnet. Then, if ever thou dar’st acknowledge it, I willmake it my quarrel.
Here’s my glove. Give me another of thine.
There.
This will I also wear in my cap. If ever thou come to me and say, after tomorrow, “This is my glove,” by this hand I will take thee a box on the ear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.
Thou dar’st as well be hanged.
Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the king’s company.
Keep thy word. Fare thee well.
Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We have French quarrels enough, if you could tell how to reckon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders. But it is no English treason to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the king himself will be a clipper.
Upon the king! Let us our lives, our souls, our debts, our careful wives, our children, and our sins lay on theking! We must bear all. O hard condition, Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel But his own wringing. What infinite heart’s ease Must kings neglect that private men enjoy? And what have kings that privates have not too, Save ceremony, save general ceremony? And what art thou, thou idol ceremony? What kind of god art thou, that suffer’st more Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? What are thy rents? What are thy comings in? O ceremony, show me but thy worth! What is thy soul of adoration? Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form, Creating awe and fear in other men, Wherein thou art less happy, being feared, Than they in fearing? What drink’st thou oft, instead of homage sweet, But poisoned flattery? Oh, be sick, great greatness, And bid thy ceremony give thee cure! Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out With titles blown from adulation? Will it give place to flexure and low bending? Canst thou, when thou command’st the beggar’s knee, Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream, That play’st so subtly with a king’s repose. I am a king that find thee, and I know 'Tis not the balm, the scepter, and the ball, The sword, the mace, the crown imperial, The intertissued robe of gold and pearl, The farcèd title running 'fore the king, The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp That beats upon the high shore of this world. No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony, Not all these, laid in bed majestical, Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, Who, with a body filled and vacant mind, Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread; Never sees horrid night, the child of hell, But, like a lackey, from the rise to set Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn, Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse, And follows so the ever-running year With profitable labor to his grave. And, but for ceremony, such a wretch, Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep, Had the forehand and vantage of a king. The slave, a member of the country’s peace, Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots What watch the king keeps to maintain the peace, Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,Seek through your camp to find you.
Good old knight,Collect them all together at my tent.I’ll be before thee.
I shall do’t, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God of battles, steel my soldiers' hearts. Possess them not with fear. Take from them now The sense of reck'ning ere th' opposèd numbers Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord, Oh, not today, think not upon the fault My father made in compassing the crown. I Richard’s body have interrèd anew, And on it have bestowed more contrite tears Than from it issued forcèd drops of blood. Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay, Who twice a day their withered hands hold up Toward heaven to pardon blood. And I have built Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will I do— Though all that I can do is nothing worth, Since that my penitence comes after all, Imploring pardon.
My liege.
My brother Gloucester’s voice.—Ay,I know thy errand. I will go with thee.The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.
The sun doth gild our armor. Up, my lords.
Montez à cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O brave spirit!
Via les eaux et la terre.
Rien puis? L'air et feu?
Cieux, cousin Orléans.
Now, my Lord Constable?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark how our steeds for present service neigh.
Mount them and make incision in their hides, That their hot blood may spin in English eyes And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!
What, will you have them weep our horses' blood?How shall we then behold their natural tears?
The English are embattled, you French peers.
To horse, you gallant princes, straight to horse. Do but behold yond poor and starvèd band, And your fair show shall suck away their souls, Leaving them but the shales and husks of men. There is not work enough for all our hands, Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins To give each naked curtal axe a stain, That our French gallants shall today draw out And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them, The vapor of our valor will o'erturn them. 'Tis positive against all exceptions, lords, That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, Who in unnecessary action swarm About our squares of battle, were enough To purge this field of such a hilding foe, Though we upon this mountain’s basis by Took stand for idle speculation, But that our honors must not. What’s to say? A very little little let us do, And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound The tucket sonance and the note to mount, For our approach shall so much dare the field That England shall couch down in fear and yield.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why do you stay so long, my lords of France? Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones, Ill-favoredly become the morning field. Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, And our air shakes them passing scornfully. Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps. The horsemen sit like fixèd candlesticks With torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes, And in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit Lies foul with chawed grass, still and motionless. And their executors, the knavish crows, Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour. Description cannot suit itself in words To demonstrate the life of such a battle In life so lifeless, as it shows itself.
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,And give their fasting horses provender,And after fight with them?
I stay but for my guard. On, to the field! I will the banner from a trumpet take And use it for my haste. Come, come away. The sun is high, and we outwear the day.
Where is the king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king himself is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.
There’s five to one. Besides, they all are fresh.
God’s arm strike with us! 'Tis a fearful odds. God be wi' you, princes all. I’ll to my charge. If we no more meet till we meet in heaven, Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford, My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter, And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu.
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today.And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.
He is as full of valor as of kindness,Princely in both.
Oh, that we now had hereBut one ten thousand of those men in EnglandThat do no work today.
What’s he that wishes so? My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin. If we are marked to die, we are enough To do our country loss; and if to live, The fewer men, the greater share of honor. God’s will, I pray thee wish not one man more. By Jove, I am not covetous for gold Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost; It yearns me not if men my garments wear; Such outward things dwell not in my desires. But if it be a sin to covet honor, I am the most offending soul alive. No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England. God’s peace, I would not lose so great an honor As one man more, methinks, would share from me, For the best hope I have. Oh, do not wish one more! Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host, That he which hath no stomach to this fight, Let him depart. His passport shall be made, And crowns for convoy put into his purse. We would not die in that man’s company That fears his fellowship to die with us. This day is called the feast of Crispian. He that outlives this day and comes safe home, Will stand o' tiptoe when the day is named And rouse him at the name of Crispian. He that shall see this day, and live old age, Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors And say, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.” Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars, And say, “These wounds I had on Crispin’s day.” Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot But he’ll remember with advantages What feats he did that day. Then shall our names, Familiar in his mouth as household words, Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter, Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester, Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered. This story shall the good man teach his son, And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by, From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be rememberèd— We few, we happy few, we band of brothers; For he today that sheds his blood with me Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, This day shall gentle his condition; And gentlemen in England now abed Shall think themselves accursed they were not here, And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.The French are bravely in their battles set,And will with all expedience charge on us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All things are ready if our minds be so.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
God’s will, my liege, would you and I alone,Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men,Which likes me better than to wish us one.—You know your places. God be with you all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry, If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound, Before thy most assurèd overthrow. For certainly thou art so near the gulf Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy, The constable desires thee thou wilt mind Thy followers of repentance, that their souls May make a peaceful and a sweet retire From off these fields where, wretches, their poor bodies Must lie and fester.
Who hath sent thee now?
The constable of France.
I pray thee, bear my former answer back. Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones. Good God, why should they mock poor fellows thus? The man that once did sell the lion’s skin While the beast lived was killed with hunting him. A many of our bodies shall no doubt Find native graves, upon the which, I trust, Shall witness live in brass of this day’s work. And those that leave their valiant bones in France, Dying like men though buried in your dunghills, They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them And draw their honors reeking up to heaven, Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime, The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France. Mark, then, abounding valor in our English, That being dead, like to the bullet’s crazing, Break out into a second course of mischief, Killing in relapse of mortality. Let me speak proudly: tell the constable We are but warriors for the working day; Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched With rainy marching in the painful field. There’s not a piece of feather in our host— Good argument, I hope, we will not fly— And time hath worn us into slovenry. But, by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim, And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night They’ll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads And turn them out of service. If they do this, As, if God please, they shall, my ransom then Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labor. Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald. They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints, Which, if they have, as I will leave 'em them, Shall yield them little. Tell the constable.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well.Thou never shalt hear herald anymore.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom.
My lord, most humbly on my knee I begThe leading of the vaward.
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away,And how Thou pleasest, God, dispose the day.
Yield, cur.
Je pense que vous êtes gentilhomme de bonne qualité.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Qualtitie calmie custure me. Art thou a gentleman? Whatis thy name? Discuss.
Ô Seigneur Dieu!
O Seigneur Dew should be a gentleman. Perpend my words,O Seigneur Dew, and mark : O Seigneur Dew, thou diest onpoint of fox, except, O Seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.
Ô, prenez miséricorde! Ayez pitié de moi!
Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys, or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat in drops of crimson blood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Est-il impossible d'Échapper la force de ton bras?
Brass, cur? Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat, offer’st me brass?
Ô, pardonnez-moi!
Say’st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?—Come hither, boy. Ask me this slave in French what is his name.
Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Monsieur le Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.
Master Fer. I’ll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him.Discuss the same in French unto him.
I do not know the French for “fer,” and “ferret,” and “firk.”
Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To the BOY) Que dit-il, monsieur?
Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, peasant, unless thou giveme crowns, brave crowns, or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
Ô, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de Dieu, me pardoner. Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison. Gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents écus
What are his words?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the crowns will take.
Petit monsieur, que dit-il?
Encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardoner aucun prisonnier; néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, il est content à vous donner la liberté, le franchisement.
Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercîments, et je m'estime heureux que j'ai tombé entre les mains d'un chevalier, je pense, le plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué seigneur d'Angleterre.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Expound unto me, boy.
He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the handsof one , as he thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice- worthy seigneur of England.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show. Follow me.
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart. But the saying is true: “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph and Nym had ten times morevalor than this roaring devil i' th' old play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would this be if he durst steal any thing adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our camp. The French might have a good prey of us if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ô diable!
Ô seigneur! Le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!
Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all! Reproach and everlasting shame Sits mocking in our plumes.
Ô méchante Fortune! Do not run away.
Why, all our ranks are broke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves.Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame! Let us die. In once more! Back again! And he that will not follow Bourbon now, Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand Like a base pander hold the chamber door, Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, His fairest daughter is contaminate.
Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now.Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
We are enough yet living in the field To smother up the English in our throngs, If any order might be thought upon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The devil take order now! I’ll to the throng.Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen,But all’s not done. Yet keep the French the field.
The duke of York commends him to your Majesty.
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour I saw him down, thrice up again and fighting. From helmet to the spur, all blood he was.
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, Larding the plain, and by his bloody side, Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds, The noble earl of Suffolk also lies. Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over, Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes That bloodily did yawn upon his face. And cries aloud, “Tarry, my cousin Suffolk. My soul shall thine keep company to heaven. Tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast, As in this glorious and well-foughten field We kept together in our chivalry.” Upon these words I came and cheered him up. He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, And with a feeble grip, says “Dear my lord, Commend my service to my sovereign.” So did he turn, and over Suffolk’s neck He threw his wounded arm and kissed his lips, And so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed A testament of noble-ending love. The pretty and sweet manner of it forced Those waters from me which I would have stopped, But I had not so much of man in me, And all my mother came into mine eyes And gave me up to tears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I blame you not,For, hearing this, I must perforce compoundWith mistful eyes, or they will issue too.
But hark, what new alarum is this same? The French have reinforced their scattered men. Then every soldier kill his prisoners. Give the word through.
Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against the law of arms. 'Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, markyou now, as can be offert, in your conscience now, is it not?
'Tis certain there’s not a boy left alive, and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter. Besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the king’s tent, wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every soldier to cut his prisoner’s throat. Oh, ’tis a gallant king!
Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What call you the town’s name where Alexander the Pig was born?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alexander the Great.
Why, I pray you, is not “pig” great? The pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I tell you, Captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld,I warrant you shall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike. There is a river in Macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at Monmouth. It is called Wye atMonmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the name of the other river. But ’tis all one; ’tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you mark Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things. Alexander, God knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and hischolers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in hisprains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, killhis best friend, Cleitus.
Our king is not like him in that. He never killed any of his friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and finished. I speak butin the figures and comparisons of it. As Alexander killed his friend Cleitus, being in his ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his good judgments, turned away the fat knight with the great-belly doublet; he was full of jests, and gipesand knaveries, and mocks—I have forgot his name.
Sir John Falstaff.
That is he. I’ll tell you, there is good men porn atMonmouth.
Here comes his Majesty.
I was not angry since I came to France Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald. Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill. If they will fight with us, bid them come down, Or void the field. They do offend our sight. If they’ll do neither, we will come to them And make them skirr away as swift as stones Enforcèd from the old Assyrian slings. Besides, we’ll cut the throats of those we have, And not a man of them that we shall take Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.
How now, what means this, herald? Know’st thou not That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom? Com’st thou again for ransom?
No, great king. I come to thee for charitable license, That we may wander o'er this bloody field To book our dead and then to bury them; To sort our nobles from our common men, For many of our princes—woe the while!— Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood. So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs In blood of princes, and the wounded steeds Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage Yerk out their armèd heels at their dead masters, Killing them twice. Oh, give us leave, great king, To view the field in safety and dispose Of their dead bodies.
I tell thee truly, herald, I know not if the day be ours or no, For yet a many of your horsemen peer And gallop o'er the field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The day is yours.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!What is this castle called that stands hard by?
They call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
Your grandfather of famous memory, an’t please your Majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince ofWales, as I have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They did, Fluellen.
Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties is remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps, which, your Majesty know, to this hour isan honorable badge of the service. And I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy’s day.
I wear it for a memorable honor,For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.
All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell you that: God pless it and preserve it as long as it pleases his Grace and his Majesty too.
Thanks, good my countryman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By Jeshu, I am your Majesty’s countryman, I care not who know it. I will confess it to all the 'orld. I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty, praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an honest man.
God keep me so.—Our heralds go with him.Bring me just notice of the numbers deadOn both our parts. [points to WILLIAMS] Call yonder fellow hither.
Soldier, you must come to the king.
Soldier, why wear’st thou that glove in thy cap?
An’t please your Majesty, ’tis the gage of one that I should fight withal, if he be alive.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An Englishman?
An ’t please your Majesty, a rascal that swaggered withme last night, who, if alive and ever dare to challengethis glove, I have sworn to take him a box o' th' ear, or if I can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, I will strike it out soundly.
What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?
He is a craven and a villain else, an ’t please your Majesty, in my conscience.
It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort, quitefrom the answer of his degree.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as Lucifer and Beelzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his vow and his oath. If he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as arrant a villain and a Jack Sauce as ever his black shoe trod upon God’s ground and His earth, in my conscience, la.
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet’st the fellow.
So I will, my liege, as I live.
Who serv’st thou under?
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.
Call him hither to me, soldier.
I will, my liege.
Here, Fluellen, wear thou this favor for me and stick it in thy cap. (gives WILLIAMS' s glove to FLUELLEN ) WhenAlençon and myself were down together, I plucked this glove from his helm. If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alençon and an enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.
Your Grace does me as great honors as can be desired inthe hearts of his subjects. I would fain see the man that has but two legs that shall find himself aggrieved at this glove, that is all; but I would fain see it once, an please God of his Grace that I might see.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know’st thou Gower?
He is my dear friend, an please you.
Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.
I will fetch him.
My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester, Follow Fluellen closely at the heels. The glove which I have given him for a favor May haply purchase him a box o' th' ear. It is the soldier’s. I by bargain should Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick. If that the soldier strike him, as I judge By his blunt bearing he will keep his word, Some sudden mischief may arise of it, For I do know Fluellen valiant And, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder, And quickly will return an injury. Follow, and see there be no harm between them. —Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.
God’s will and His pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the king. There is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
Sir, know you this glove?
Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.
I know this, and thus I challenge it. [strikes him]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any ’s in the universal world, or in France, or in England!
How now, sir? You villain!
Do you think I’ll be forsworn?
Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason his payment into plows, I warrant you.
I am no traitor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s a lie in thy throat.—I charge you in his Majesty’s name, apprehend him. He’s a friend of the DukeAlençon’s.
How now, how now, what’s the matter?
My Lord of Warwick, here is, praised be God for it, a most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer’s day.
Here is his Majesty.
How now, what’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your Grace, has struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of Alençon.
My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it. And he that I gave it to in change promised to wear it in his cap. I promised to strike him if he did. I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I have been as good as my word.
Your Majesty, hear now, saving your Majesty’s manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. Ihope your Majesty is pear me testimony and witness, andwill avouchment that this is the glove of Alençon that your Majesty is give me, in your conscience now.
Give me thy glove, soldier. Look, here is the fellow ofit.'Twas I indeed thou promised’st to strike,And thou hast given me most bitter terms.
An please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How canst thou make me satisfaction?
All offenses, my lord, come from the heart. Never came any from mine that might offend your Majesty.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.
Your Majesty came not like yourself. You appeared to mebut as a common man. Witness the night, your garments, your lowliness. And what your Highness suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own fault andnot mine, for, had you been as I took you for, I made no offense. Therefore, I beseech your Highness pardon me.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns And give it to this fellow.— Keep it, fellow, And wear it for an honor in thy cap Till I do challenge it. —Give him the crowns. —And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly. —Hold, there is twelve pence for you, and I pray you to serve God and keep you out of prawls and prabbles and quarrels and dissensions, and I warrant you it is the better for you.
I will none of your money.
It is with a good will. I can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes. Come, wherefore should you be sopashful? Your shoes is not so good. 'Tis a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.
Now, herald, are the dead numbered?
Here is the number of the slaughtered French.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
Charles, duke of Orléans, nephew to the king; John, duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt. Of other lords and barons, knights and squires, Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French That in the field lie slain. Of princes in this number And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead One hundred twenty-six. Added to these, Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen, Eight thousand and four hundred, of the which, Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights. So that in these ten thousand they have lost, There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries. The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, And gentlemen of blood and quality. The names of those their nobles that lie dead: Charles Delabreth, high constable of France; Jaques of Chatillon, admiral of France; The Master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures; Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dauphin; John, duke of Alençon; Anthony, duke of Brabant, The brother of the duke of Burgundy, And Edward, duke of Bar. Of lusty earls: Grandpré and Roussi, Faulconbridge and Foix, Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale. Here was a royal fellowship of death. Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the duke of York, the earl of Suffolk, Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire; None else of name, and of all other men But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here, And not to us but to thy arm alone Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem, But in plain shock and even play of battle, Was ever known so great and little loss On one part and on th' other? Take it, God, For it is none but thine.
'Tis wonderful.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, go we in procession to the village, And be it death proclaimèd through our host To boast of this or take that praise from God Which is His only.
Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how many is killed?
Yes, Captain, but with this acknowledgement:That God fought for us.
Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.
Do we all holy rites. Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum, The dead with charity enclosed in clay, And then to Calais, and to England then, Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story That I may prompt them; and of such as have, I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse Of time, of numbers, and due course of things, Which cannot in their huge and proper life Be here presented. Now we bear the king Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen, Heave him away upon your wingèd thoughts Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys, Whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed sea, Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king Seems to prepare his way. So let him land, And solemnly see him set on to London. So swift a pace hath thought that even now You may imagine him upon Blackheath, Where that his lords desire him to have borne His bruisèd helmet and his bended sword Before him through the city. He forbids it, Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride, Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent Quite from himself, to God. But now behold, In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought, How London doth pour out her citizens. The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort, Like to the senators of th' antique Rome, With the plebeians swarming at their heels, Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in— As, by a lower but loving likelihood, Were now the general of our gracious empress, As in good time he may, from Ireland coming, Bringing rebellion broached on his sword, How many would the peaceful city quit To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause, Did they this Harry. Now in London place him (As yet the lamentation of the French Invites the king of England’s stay at home; The emperor’s coming in behalf of France To order peace between them) and omit All the occurrences, whatever chanced, Till Harry’s back return again to France. There must we bring him, and myself have played The interim, by remembering you ’tis past. Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
Nay, that’s right. But why wear you your leek today? SaintDavy’s day is past.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. I will tell you as my friend, Captain Gower. Therascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and yourself and all the world know tobe no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek. I t was in place where I could not breed no contention with him, but I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I seehim once again, and then I will tell him a little pieceof my desires.
Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
'Tis no matter for his swellings, nor his turkey-cocks.—God pless you, Aunchient Pistol, you scurvy, lousy knave,God pless you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan, to have me fold up Parca’s fatal web? Hence. I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, lookyou, this leek. Because, look you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions does not agree with it, I would desire you toeat it.
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.
There is one goat for you. [strikes him] Will you be sogood, scald knave, as eat it?
Base Trojan, thou shalt die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You say very true, scald knave, when God’s will is. I will desire you to live in the meantime and eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce for it. (strikes him) Youcalled me yesterday “mountain squire,” but I will make you today a squire of low degree. I pray you, fall to. If you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.
Enough, Captain. You have astonished him.
I say I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his pate four days.— Bite, I pray you. It is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.
Must I bite?
Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question, too, and ambiguities.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this leek, I will most horribly revenge. I eat and eat, I swear—
Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more sauce to your leek? There is not enough leek to swear by.
Quiet thy cudgel. Thou dost see I eat.
Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. Nay, pray you throw none away. The skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions to see leeks hereafter,I pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.
Good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.
Me, a groat?
Yes, verily, and in truth you shall take it, or I have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.
If I owe you anything, I will pay you in cudgels. You shall be a woodmonger and buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi' you and keep you and heal your pate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All hell shall stir for this.
Go, go. You are a counterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon an honorable respect and worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words? I have seen you gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You thought because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English cudgel. You find it otherwise, and henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good English condition. Fare you well.
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now? News have I that my Nell is dead i' th' spital Of a malady of France, And there my rendezvous is quite cut off. Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs Honor is cudgeled. Well, bawd I’ll turn, And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand. To England will I steal, and there I’ll steal. And patches will I get unto these cudgeled scars, And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
Unto our brother France and to our sister, Health and fair time of day. —Joy and good wishes To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.— And, as a branch and member of this royalty, By whom this great assembly is contrived, We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy.— And princes French, and peers, health to you all. Peace to this meeting wherefore we are met.
Right joyous are we to behold your face,Most worthy brother England. Fairly met.—So are you, princes English, every one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So happy be the issue, brother England, Of this good day and of this gracious meeting, As we are now glad to behold your eyes— Your eyes which hitherto have borne in them Against the French that met them in their bent The fatal balls of murdering basilisks. The venom of such looks, we fairly hope, Have lost their quality, and that this day Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
To cry “Amen” to that, thus we appear.
You English princes all, I do salute you.
My duty to you both, on equal love, Great kings of France and England. That I have labored With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors, To bring your most imperial Majesties Unto this bar and royal interview, Your mightiness on both parts best can witness. Since, then, my office hath so far prevailed That face to face and royal eye to eye You have congreeted. Let it not disgrace me If I demand before this royal view What rub or what impediment there is Why that the naked, poor, and mangled peace, Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births, Should not in this best garden of the world, Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage? Alas, she hath from France too long been chased, And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps, Corrupting in its own fertility. Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, Unprunèd, dies. Her hedges, even-pleached, Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, Put forth disordered twigs. Her fallow leas The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts That should deracinate such savagery. The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover, Wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank, Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs, Losing both beauty and utility. And as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges, Defective in their natures, grow to wildness, Even so our houses and ourselves and children Have lost, or do not learn for want of time, The sciences that should become our country, But grow like savages, as soldiers will That nothing do but meditate on blood, To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire, And everything that seems unnatural. Which to reduce into our former favor You are assembled, and my speech entreats That I may know the let why gentle peace Should not expel these inconveniences And bless us with her former qualities.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace, Whose want gives growth to th' imperfections Which you have cited, you must buy that peace With full accord to all our just demands, Whose tenors and particular effects You have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king hath heard them, to the which as yetThere is no answer made.
Well then, the peace which you before so urgedLies in his answer.
I have but with a cursitory eye O'erglanced the articles. Pleaseth your Grace To appoint some of your council presently To sit with us once more with better heed To resurvey them, we will suddenly Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
Brother, we shall.—Go, uncle Exeter, And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester, Warwick and Huntingdon, go with the king And take with you free power to ratify, Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best Shall see advantageable for our dignity, Anything in or out of our demands, And we’ll consign thereto.— Will you, fair sister, Go with the princes or stay here with us?
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.Haply a woman’s voice may do some good,When articles too nicely urged be stood on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us.She is our capital demand, comprisedWithin the forerank of our articles.
She hath good leave.
Fair Katherine, and most fair, Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms Such as will enter at a lady’s ear And plead his love suit to her gentle heart?
Your Majesty shall mock at me. I cannot speak yourEngland.
O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with yourFrench heart, I will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue. Do you like me, Kate?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell what is “like me.”
An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.
[To ALICE ) Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable à les anges?
Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grâce, ainsi dit-il.
I said so, dear Katherine; and I must not blush to affirm it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ô bon Dieu! Les langues des hommes sont pleines de tromperies.
What says she, fair one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?
Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits; dat is de princess.
The princess is the better Englishwoman. —I' faith, Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding. I am glad thou canst speak no better English, for if thou couldst,thou wouldst find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my crown. I knowno ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, “I love you.” Then if you urge me farther than to say, “Do you, in faith?” I wear out my suit. Give me your answer,i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How say you, lady?
Sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid me. For the one, I have neither words nor measure; and for the other, I have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. If I could win a lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, I should quickly leap into a wife. Or if I might buffet for my love or bound my horse for her favors, I could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jackanapes, never off. But, before God, Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp outmy eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation, only downright oaths, which I never use till urged, nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sun-burning, that never looks in his glass for love of any thing he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. I speak to thee plain soldier: If thou canst love me for this, take me: if not, to say to thee that I shall die, is true: but for thy love, by the Lord, no; yet I love thee too. And while thou livest, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain anduncoined constancy; because he perforce must do thee right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other places: for these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies' favours, they do always reason themselves out again. What! a speaker is but a prater; a rhyme is but a ballad. A good leg will fall; astraight back will stoop; a black beard will turn white; a curled pate will grow bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax hollow: but a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon; or rather, the sun, and not the moon; for it shines bright and never changes, but keeps its course truly. If thou would have such a one, take me; and take me, take a soldier; take a soldier, take a king. And what sayest thou then to my love? speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?
No, it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate. But, in loving me, you should love the friend of France, for I love France so well that I will not part with a village of it. I will have it all mine. And, Kate, when France is mine and I am yours, then yours is France and you are mine.
I cannot tell wat is dat.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married wife about her husband’s neck, hardly to be shook off. Je quand surle possession de France, et quand vous avez le possession de moi —let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my speed!— donc vôtre est France et vous êtes mienne. Itis as easy for me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French. I shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il estmeilleur que l'anglais lequel je parle.
No, faith, is ’t not, Kate, but thy speaking of my tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely must needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate, dost thou understand thus much English? Canst thou love me?
I cannot tell.
Can any of your neighbors tell, Kate? I’ll ask them. Come, I know thou lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you’ll question this gentlewoman aboutme, and, I know, Kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. But, good Kate, mock me mercifully, the rather, gentle princess, because I love thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou and I, between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half English, that shall goto Constantinople and take the Turk by the beard? Shallwe not? What say’st thou, my fair flower de luce?
I do not know dat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, ’tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. Do but now promise, Kate, you will endeavor for your French part of such a boy; and for my English moiety take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer you, la plus belle Katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?
Your Majestée ave fausse French enough to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en France.
Now fie upon my false French. By mine honor, in true English, I love thee, Kate. By which honor I dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and untemperingeffect of my visage. Now, beshrew my father’s ambition!He was thinking of civil wars when he got me; thereforewas I created with a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that when I come to woo ladies, I fright them. But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear. My comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up ofbeauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better. And therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have me? Put off your maiden blushes, avouch the thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress, take me by the hand, and say “Harry of England, I am thine,” which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but I will tell thee aloud “England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Harry Plantagenet is thine,” who, though Ispeak it before his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the best king of good fellows. Come, your answer in broken music, for thy voice is music and thy English broken. Therefore, queen of all, Katherine, break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt thou have me?
Dat is as it sall please de roi mon père.
Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Den it sall also content me.
Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you my queen.
Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne veux point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main d'une—Notre Seigneur!—indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon très puissant seigneur.
Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.
Les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leur noces, il n'est pas la coutume de France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam my interpreter, what says she?
Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of France—Icannot tell wat is baiser en Anglish.
To kiss.
Your Majesté entendre bettre que moi.
It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are married, would she say?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oui, vraiment.
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be confined within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are the makers of manners, Kate, and the liberty that follows our places stops the mouth of all find- faults, as I will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss. Therefore, patiently and yielding. [kissing her] You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate. There is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the French council, and they should sooner persuade Harry of England than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.
God save your Majesty. My royal cousin, teach you our princess English?
I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly Ilove her, and that is good English.
Is she not apt?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth, so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will appear in his true likeness.
Pardon the frankness of my mirth if I answer you for that . If you would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boyin her naked seeing self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.
Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.
They are then excused, my lord, when they see not what they do.
Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning, for maids, well summered and warm kept, are like flies at Bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.
This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer. And so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter endand she must be blind too.
As love is, my lord, before it loves.
It is so. And you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands in my way.
Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with maidenwalls that war hath never entered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall Kate be my wife?
So please you.
I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may waiton her. So the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will.
We have consented to all terms of reason.
Is ’t so, my lords of England?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king hath granted every article,His daughter first, and, in sequel, all,According to their firm proposed natures.
Only he hath not yet subscribèd this: Where your Majesty demands that the king of France, having any occasion to write for matter of grant, shall name your Highness in this form and with this addition, in French: Notre très cher fils Henri, roi d'Angleterre,héritier de France ; and thus in Latin: Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, rex Angliae, et haeres Franciae.
Nor this I have not, brother, so deniedBut your request shall make me let it pass.
I pray you, then, in love and dear alliance, Let that one article rank with the rest, And thereupon give me your daughter.
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms Of France and England, whose very shores look pale With envy of each other’s happiness, May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction Plant neighborhood and Christian-like accord In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Amen.
Now welcome, Kate, and bear me witness allThat here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
God, the best maker of all marriages, Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. As man and wife, being two, are one in love, So be there ’twixt your kingdoms such a spousal That never may ill office or fell jealousy, Which troubles oft the bed of blessèd marriage, Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms To make divorce of their incorporate league, That English may as French, French Englishmen, Receive each other. God speak this “amen”!
Amen.
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day, My Lord of Burgundy, we’ll take your oath, And all the peers', for surety of our leagues. Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me, And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus far with rough and all-unable pen Our bending author hath pursued the story, In little room confining mighty men, Mangling by starts the full course of their glory. Small time, but in that small most greatly lived This star of England. Fortune made his sword, By which the world’s best garden he achieved And of it left his son imperial lord. Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crowned king Of France and England, did this king succeed, Whose state so many had the managing That they lost France and made his England bleed, Which oft our stage hath shown. And for their sake, In your fair minds let this acceptance take.
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night! Comets, importing change of times and states, Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky, And with them scourge the bad revolting stars That have consented unto Henry's death! King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long! England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.
England ne'er had a king until his time. Virtue he had, deserving to command: His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams: His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings; His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire, More dazzled and drove back his enemies Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces. What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech: He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.
We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood? Henry is dead and never shall revive: Upon a wooden coffin we attend, And death's dishonourable victory We with our stately presence glorify, Like captives bound to a triumphant car. What! shall we curse the planets of mishap That plotted thus our glory's overthrow? Or shall we think the subtle-witted French Conjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of him By magic verses have contrived his end?
He was a king bless'd of the King of kings. Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day So dreadful will not be as was his sight. The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought: The church's prayers made him so prosperous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The church! where is it? Had not churchmen pray'd, His thread of life had not so soon decay'd: None do you like but an effeminate prince, Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.
Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art protector And lookest to command the prince and realm. Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe, More than God or religious churchmen may.
Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh,And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'stExcept it be to pray against thy foes.
Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace: Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us: Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms: Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead. Posterity, await for wretched years, When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck, Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears, And none but women left to wail the dead. Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate: Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils, Combat with adverse planets in the heavens! A far more glorious star thy soul will make Than Julius Caesar or bright—
My honourable lords, health to you all! Sad tidings bring I to you out of France, Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture: Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans, Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse? Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.
Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up?If Henry were recall'd to life again,These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
How were they lost? What treachery was used?
No treachery; but want of men and money. Amongst the soldiers this is muttered, That here you maintain several factions, And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought, You are disputing of your generals: One would have lingering wars with little cost; Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings; A third thinks, without expense at all, By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd. Awake, awake, English nobility! Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot: Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms; Of England's coat one half is cut away.
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Me they concern; Regent I am of France. Give me my steeled coat. I'll fight for France. Away with these disgraceful wailing robes! Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes, To weep their intermissive miseries.
Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance. France is revolted from the English quite, Except some petty towns of no import: The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims; The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd; Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part; The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.
The Dauphin crowned king! All fly to him!O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?
We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats.Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.
Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?An army have I muster'd in my thoughts,Wherewith already France is overrun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My gracious lords, to add to your laments, Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse, I must inform you of a dismal fight Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.
What! Wherein Talbot overcame? Is't so?
O, no; wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown: The circumstance I'll tell you more at large. The tenth of August last this dreadful lord, Retiring from the siege of Orleans, Having full scarce six thousand in his troop. By three and twenty thousand of the French Was round encompassed and set upon. No leisure had he to enrank his men; He wanted pikes to set before his archers; Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges They pitched in the ground confusedly, To keep the horsemen off from breaking in. More than three hours the fight continued; Where valiant Talbot above human thought Enacted wonders with his sword and lance: Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him; Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew: The French exclaim'd, the devil was in arms; All the whole army stood agazed on him: His soldiers spying his undaunted spirit A Talbot! A Talbot! Cried out amain And rush'd into the bowels of the battle. Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up, If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward: He, being in the vaward, placed behind With purpose to relieve and follow them, Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke. Hence grew the general wreck and massacre; Enclosed were they with their enemies: A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace, Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back, Whom all France with their chief assembled strength Durst not presume to look once in the face.
Is Talbot slain? Then I will slay myself, For living idly here in pomp and ease, Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid, Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.
O no, he lives; but is took prisoner,And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford:Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His ransom there is none but I shall pay: I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne: His crown shall be the ransom of my friend; Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours. Farewell, my masters; to my task will I; Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make, To keep our great Saint George's feast withal: Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take, Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
So you had need; for Orleans is besieged; The English army is grown weak and faint: The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply, And hardly keeps his men from mutiny, Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.
I do remember it; and here take my leave,To go about my preparation.
I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can,To view the artillery and munition;And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To Eltham will I, where the young king is,Being ordain'd his special governor,And for his safety there I'll best devise.
Each hath his place and function to attend: I am left out; for me nothing remains. But long I will not be Jack out of office: The king from Eltham I intend to steal And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens So in the earth, to this day is not known: Late did he shine upon the English side; Now we are victors; upon us he smiles. What towns of any moment but we have? At pleasure here we lie near Orleans; Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts, Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves: Either they must be dieted like mules And have their provender tied to their mouths Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
Let's raise the siege: why live we idly here? Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear: Remaineth none but mad-brain'd Salisbury; And he may well in fretting spend his gall, Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sound, sound alarum! we will rush on them. Now for the honour of the forlorn French! Him I forgive my death that killeth me When he sees me go back one foot or fly.
Who ever saw the like? What men have I!Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled,But that they left me 'midst my enemies.
Salisbury is a desperate homicide; He fighteth as one weary of his life. The other lords, like lions wanting food, Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records, England all Olivers and Rowlands bred, During the time Edward the Third did reign. More truly now may this be verified; For none but Samsons and Goliases It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten! Lean, raw-boned rascals! who would e'er suppose They had such courage and audacity?
Let's leave this town; for they are hare-brain'd slaves, And hunger will enforce them to be more eager: Of old I know them; rather with their teeth The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think, by some odd gimmors or device Their arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on; Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do. By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
Be it so.
Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall'd: Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence? Be not dismay'd, for succor is at hand: A holy maid hither with me I bring, Which by a vision sent to her from heaven Ordained is to raise this tedious siege And drive the English forth the bounds of France. The spirit of deep prophecy she hath, Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome: What's past and what's to come she can descry. Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words, For they are certain and unfallible.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, call her in.
But first, to try her skill, Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place: Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern: By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
Fair maid, is't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
Reignier, is't thou that thinkest to beguile me? Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind; I know thee well, though never seen before. Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me: In private will I talk with thee apart. Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter, My wit untrain'd in any kind of art. Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased To shine on my contemptible estate: Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs, And to sun's parching heat display'd my cheeks, God's mother deigned to appear to me And in a vision full of majesty Will'd me to leave my base vocation And free my country from calamity: Her aid she promised and assured success: In complete glory she reveal'd herself; And, whereas I was black and swart before, With those clear rays which she infused on me That beauty am I bless'd with which you see. Ask me what question thou canst possible, And I will answer unpremeditated: My courage try by combat, if thou darest, And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex. Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate, If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.
Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms: Only this proof I'll of thy valour make, In single combat thou shalt buckle with me, And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true; Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
I am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword, Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side; The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharine's churchyard, Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.
Then come, o' God's name; I fear no woman.
And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, stay thy hands! thou art an AmazonAnd fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Christ's mother helps me, else I were too weak.
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me: Impatiently I burn with thy desire; My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued. Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so, Let me thy servant and not sovereign be: 'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
I must not yield to any rites of love, For my profession's sacred from above: When I have chased all thy foes from hence, Then will I think upon a recompense.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock;Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
He may mean more than we poor men do know:These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
My lord, where are you? What devise you on?Shall we give over Orleans, or no?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, no, I say, distrustful recreants!Fight till the last gasp; I will be your guard.
What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.
Assign'd am I to be the English scourge. This night the siege assuredly I'll raise: Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyon days, Since I have entered into these wars. Glory is like a circle in the water, Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought. With Henry's death the English circle ends; Dispersed are the glories it included. Now am I like that proud insulting ship Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove? Thou with an eagle art inspired then. Helen, the mother of great Constantine, Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters, were like thee. Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth, How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours;Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.
Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it:No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.
I am come to survey the Tower this day: Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance. Where be these warders, that they wait not here? Open the gates; 'tis Gloucester that calls.
[Within] Who's there that knocks so imperiously?It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
[Within] Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.Villains, answer you so the lord protector?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Within] The Lord protect him! so we answer him:We do no otherwise than we are will'd.
Who willed you? Or whose will stands but mine? There's none protector of the realm but I. Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize. Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
What noise is this? What traitors have we here?
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?Open the gates; here's Gloucester that would enter.
Have patience, noble duke; I may not open; The Cardinal of Winchester forbids: From him I have express commandment That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faint-hearted Woodvile, prizest him 'fore me? Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate, Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook? Thou art no friend to God or to the king: Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly. Serving-Men Open the gates unto the lord protector, Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
How now, ambitious Humphry! What means this?
Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
I do, thou most usurping proditor,And not protector, of the king or realm.
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator, Thou that contrivedst to murder our dead lord; Thou that givest whores indulgences to sin: I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat, If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back:Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-clothI'll use to carry thee out of this place.
Do what thou darest; I beard thee to thy face.
What! am I dared and bearded to my face? Draw, men, for all this privileged place; Blue coats to tawny coats. Priest, beware your beard, I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly: Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat: In spite of pope or dignities of church, Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope! Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay? Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array. Out, tawny coats! out, scarlet hypocrite!
Fie, lords! That you, being supreme magistrates,Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
Peace, mayor! Thou know'st little of my wrongs:Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens, One that still motions war and never peace, O'ercharging your free purses with large fines, That seeks to overthrow religion, Because he is protector of the realm, And would have armour here out of the Tower, To crown himself king and suppress the prince.
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife But to make open proclamation: Come, officer; as loud as e'er thou canst, Cry.
All manner of men assembled here in arms this day against God's peace and the king's, we charge and command you, in his highness' name, to repair to your several dwelling-places; and not to wear, handle, or use any sword, weapon, or dagger, henceforward, upon pain of death.
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law:But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.
Gloucester, we will meet; to thy cost, be sure:Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.
I'll call for clubs, if you will not away.This cardinal's more haughty than the devil.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mayor, farewell: thou dost but what thou mayst.
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head;For I intend to have it ere long.
See the coast clear'd, and then we will depart.Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!I myself fight not once in forty year.
Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleans is besieged,And how the English have the suburbs won.
Father, I know; and oft have shot at them,Howe'er unfortunate I miss'd my aim.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me: Chief master-gunner am I of this town; Something I must do to procure me grace. The prince's espials have informed me How the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd, Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars In yonder tower, to overpeer the city, And thence discover how with most advantage They may vex us with shot, or with assault. To intercept this inconvenience, A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed; And even these three days have I watch'd, If I could see them. Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer. If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word; And thou shalt find me at the governor's.
Father, I warrant you; take you no care;I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.
Talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd! How wert thou handled being prisoner? Or by what means got'st thou to be released? Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles; For him was I exchanged and ransomed. But with a baser man of arms by far Once in contempt they would have barter'd me: Which I, disdaining, scorn'd; and craved death, Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd. In fine, redeem'd I was as I desired. But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart, Whom with my bare fists I would execute, If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts. In open market-place produced they me, To be a public spectacle to all: Here, said they, is the terror of the French, The scarecrow that affrights our children so. Then broke I from the officers that led me, And with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground, To hurl at the beholders of my shame: My grisly countenance made others fly; None durst come near for fear of sudden death. In iron walls they deem'd me not secure; So great fear of my name 'mongst them was spread, That they supposed I could rend bars of steel, And spurn in pieces posts of adamant: Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had, That walked about me every minute-while; And if I did but stir out of my bed, Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
I grieve to hear what torments you endured, But we will be revenged sufficiently Now it is supper-time in Orleans: Here, through this grate, I count each one and view the Frenchmen how they fortify: Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee. Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale, Let me have your express opinions Where is best place to make our battery next.
I think, at the north gate; for there stand lords.
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.
For aught I see, this city must be famish'd,Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!
O Lord, have mercy on me, woful man!
What chance is this that suddenly hath cross'd us? Speak, Salisbury; at least, if thou canst speak: How farest thou, mirror of all martial men? One of thy eyes and thy cheek's side struck off! Accursed tower! accursed fatal hand That hath contrived this woful tragedy! In thirteen battles Salisbury o'ercame; Henry the Fifth he first train'd to the wars; Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up, His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field. Yet livest thou, Salisbury? Though thy speech doth fail, One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace: The sun with one eye vieweth all the world. Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive, If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands! Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it. Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life? Speak unto Talbot; nay, look up to him. Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort; Thou shalt not die whiles— He beckons with his hand and smiles on me. As who should say 'When I am dead and gone, Remember to avenge me on the French.' Plantagenet, I will; and like thee, Nero, Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn: Wretched shall France be only in my name.
What stir is this? What tumult's in the heavens?Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head: The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join'd, A holy prophetess new risen up, Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan! It irks his heart he cannot be revenged. Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you: Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish, Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels, And make a quagmire of your mingled brains. Convey me Salisbury into his tent, And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them:A woman clad in armour chaseth them.
Here, here she comes. I'll have a bout with thee; Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee: Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch, And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.
Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail? My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder. But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Talbot, farewell; thy hour is not yet come:I must go victual Orleans forthwith.
O'ertake me, if thou canst; I scorn thy strength. Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men; Help Salisbury to make his testament: This day is ours, as many more shall be.
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel; I know not where I am, nor what I do; A witch, by fear, not force, like Hannibal, Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists: So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench Are from their hives and houses driven away. They call'd us for our fierceness English dogs; Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.
Hark, countrymen! either renew the fight, Or tear the lions out of England's coat; Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions' stead: Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf, Or horse or oxen from the leopard, As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
It will not be: retire into your trenches: You all consented unto Salisbury's death, For none would strike a stroke in his revenge. Pucelle is enter'd into Orleans, In spite of us or aught that we could do. O, would I were to die with Salisbury! The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Advance our waving colours on the walls;Rescued is Orleans from the EnglishThus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter, How shall I honour thee for this success? Thy promises are like Adonis' gardens That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next. France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess! Recover'd is the town of Orleans: More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.
Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town? Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires And feast and banquet in the open streets, To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy,When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.
'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won; For which I will divide my crown with her, And all the priests and friars in my realm Shall in procession sing her endless praise. A statelier pyramis to her I'll rear Than Rhodope's or Memphis' ever was: In memory of her when she is dead, Her ashes, in an urn more precious Than the rich-jewel'd of Darius, Transported shall be at high festivals Before the kings and queens of France. No longer on Saint Denis will we cry, But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint. Come in, and let us banquet royally, After this golden day of victory.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirs, take your places and be vigilant: If any noise or soldier you perceive Near to the walls, by some apparent sign Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
Sergeant, you shall.
Thus are poor servitors,When others sleep upon their quiet beds,Constrain'd to watch in darkness, rain and cold.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy, By whose approach the regions of Artois, Wallon and Picardy are friends to us, This happy night the Frenchmen are secure, Having all day caroused and banqueted: Embrace we then this opportunity As fitting best to quittance their deceit Contrived by art and baleful sorcery.
Coward of France! How much he wrongs his fame,Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,To join with witches and the help of hell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Traitors have never other company.But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
A maid, they say.
A maid! and be so martial!
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,If underneath the standard of the FrenchShe carry armour as she hath begun.
Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:God is our fortress, in whose conquering nameLet us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ascend, brave Talbot; we will follow thee.
Not all together: better far, I guess, That we do make our entrance several ways; That, if it chance the one of us do fail, The other yet may rise against their force.
Agreed: I'll to yond corner.
And I to this.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave. Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right Of English Henry , shall this night appear How much in duty I am bound to both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Arm! Arm! The enemy doth make assault!
How now, my lords! What, all unready so?
Unready! Ay, and glad we 'scaped so well.
'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.
Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms,Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterpriseMore venturous or desperate than this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.
If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him.
Here cometh Charles: I marvel how he sped.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame? Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal, Make us partakers of a little gain, That now our loss might be ten times so much?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend! At all times will you have my power alike? Sleeping or waking must I still prevail, Or will you blame and lay the fault on me? Improvident soldiers! had your watch been good, This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.
Duke of Alencon, this was your default,That, being captain of the watch to-night,Did look no better to that weighty charge.
Had all your quarters been as safely keptAs that whereof I had the government,We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And so was mine, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And, for myself, most part of all this night, Within her quarter and mine own precinct I was employ'd in passing to and fro, About relieving of the sentinels: Then how or which way should they first break in?
Question, my lords, no further of the case, How or which way: 'tis sure they found some place But weakly guarded, where the breach was made. And now there rests no other shift but this; To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispersed, And lay new platforms to endamage them.
I'll be so bold to take what they have left. The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword; For I have loaden me with many spoils, Using no other weapon but his name.
The day begins to break, and night is fled,Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.Here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury, And here advance it in the market-place, The middle centre of this cursed town. Now have I paid my vow unto his soul; For every drop of blood was drawn from him, There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight. And that hereafter ages may behold What ruin happen'd in revenge of him, Within their chiefest temple I'll erect A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd: Upon the which, that every one may read, Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans, The treacherous manner of his mournful death And what a terror he had been to France. But, lords, in all our bloody massacre, I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace, His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc, Nor any of his false confederates.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began, Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds, They did amongst the troops of armed men Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.
Myself, as far as I could well discern For smoke and dusky vapours of the night, Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull, When arm in arm they both came swiftly running, Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves That could not live asunder day or night. After that things are set in order here, We'll follow them with all the power we have.
All hail, my lords! which of this princely trainCall ye the warlike Talbot, for his actsSo much applauded through the realm of France?
Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him?
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne, With modesty admiring thy renown, By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe To visit her poor castle where she lies, That she may boast she hath beheld the man Whose glory fills the world with loud report.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport, When ladies crave to be encounter'd with. You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.
Ne'er trust me then; for when a world of men Could not prevail with all their oratory, Yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruled: And therefore tell her I return great thanks, And in submission will attend on her. Will not your honours bear me company?
No, truly; it is more than manners will:And I have heard it said, unbidden guestsAre often welcomest when they are gone.
Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.Come hither, captain.
You perceive my mind?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.
Porter, remember what I gave in charge;And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
Madam, I will.
The plot is laid: if all things fall out right, I shall as famous be by this exploit As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death. Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight, And his achievements of no less account: Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears, To give their censure of these rare reports.
Madam,According as your ladyship desired,By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And he is welcome. What! Is this the man?
Madam, it is.
Is this the scourge of France? Is this the Talbot, so much fear'd abroad That with his name the mothers still their babes? I see report is fabulous and false: I thought I should have seen some Hercules, A second Hector , for his grim aspect, And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs. Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf! It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp Should strike such terror to his enemies.
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you;But since your ladyship is not at leisure,I'll sort some other time to visit you.
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, my Lord Talbot; for my lady cravesTo know the cause of your abrupt departure.
Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,I go to certify her Talbot's here.
If thou be he, then thou art a prisoner.
Prisoner! To whom?
To me, blood-thirsty lord; And for that cause I trained thee to my house. Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me, For in my gallery thy picture hangs: But now the substance shall endure the like, And I will chain these legs and arms of thine, That hast by tyranny these many years Wasted our country, slain our citizens And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha, ha!
Laughest thou, wretch? Thy mirth shall turn to moan.
I laugh to see your ladyship so fondTo think that you have aught but Talbot's shadowWhereon to practise your severity.
Why, art not thou the man?
I am indeed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then have I substance too.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself: You are deceived, my substance is not here; For what you see is but the smallest part And least proportion of humanity: I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here, It is of such a spacious lofty pitch, Your roof were not sufficient to contain't.
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;He will be here, and yet he is not here:How can these contrarieties agree?
That will I show you presently.
How say you, madam? Are you now persuaded That Talbot is but shadow of himself? These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength, With which he yoketh your rebellious necks, Razeth your cities and subverts your towns And in a moment makes them desolate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Victorious Talbot! Pardon my abuse: I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited And more than may be gather'd by thy shape. Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath; For I am sorry that with reverence I did not entertain thee as thou art.
Be not dismay'd, fair lady; nor misconstrue The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake The outward composition of his body. What you have done hath not offended me; Nor other satisfaction do I crave, But only, with your patience, that we may Taste of your wine and see what cates you have; For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
With all my heart, and think me honouredTo feast so great a warrior in my house.
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?Dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Within the Temple-hall we were too loud;The garden here is more convenient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then say at once if I maintain'd the truth;Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?
Faith, I have been a truant in the law,And never yet could frame my will to it;And therefore frame the law unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch; Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth; Between two blades, which bears the better temper: Between two horses, which doth bear him best; Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye; I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement; But in these nice sharp quillets of the law, Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:The truth appears so naked on my sideThat any purblind eye may find it out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And on my side it is so well apparell'd,So clear, so shining and so evidentThat it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak, In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts: Let him that is a true-born gentleman And stands upon the honour of his birth, If he suppose that I have pleaded truth, From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,But dare maintain the party of the truth,Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
I love no colours, and without all colourOf base insinuating flatteryI pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
I pluck this red rose with young SomersetAnd say withal I think he held the right.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more, Till you conclude that he upon whose side The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
And I.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case.I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose redAnd fall on my side so, against your will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I my lord, for my opinion bleed,Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurtAnd keep me on the side where still I am.
Well, well, come on: who else?
Unless my study and my books be false,The argument you held was wrong in you:
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here in my scabbard, meditating thatShall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses;For pale they look with fear, as witnessingThe truth on our side.
No, Plantagenet, 'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses, And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth;Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses,That shall maintain what I have said is true,Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset; His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence, Third son to the third Edward King of England: Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
He bears him on the place's privilege,Or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.
By him that made me, I'll maintain my words On any plot of ground in Christendom. Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge, For treason executed in our late king's days? And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted, Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry? His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood; And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My father was attached, not attainted, Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor; And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset, Were growing time once ripen'd to my will. For your partaker Pole and you yourself, I'll note you in my book of memory, To scourge you for this apprehension: Look to it well and say you are well warn'd.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still;And know us by these colours for thy foes,For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose, As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate, Will I for ever and my faction wear, Until it wither with me to my grave Or flourish to the height of my degree.
Go forward and be choked with thy ambition!And so farewell until I meet thee next.
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How I am braved and must perforce endure it!
This blot that they object against your house Shall be wiped out in the next parliament Call'd for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester; And if thou be not then created York, I will not live to be accounted Warwick. Meantime, in signal of my love to thee, Against proud Somerset and William Pole, Will I upon thy party wear this rose: And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day, Grown to this faction in the Temple-garden, Shall send between the red rose and the white A thousand souls to death and deadly night.
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.
And so will I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, gentle sir.Come, let us four to dinner: I dare sayThis quarrel will drink blood another day.
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age, Let dying Mortimer here rest himself. Even like a man new haled from the rack, So fare my limbs with long imprisonment. And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death, Nestor-like aged in an age of care, Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer. These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent, Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent; Weak shoulders, overborne with burthening grief, And pithless arms, like to a wither'd vine That droops his sapless branches to the ground; Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb, Unable to support this lump of clay, Swift-winged with desire to get a grave, As witting I no other comfort have. But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come:We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber;And answer was return'd that he will come.
Enough: my soul shall then be satisfied. Poor gentleman! his wrong doth equal mine. Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign, Before whose glory I was great in arms, This loathsome sequestration have I had: And even since then hath Richard been obscured, Deprived of honour and inheritance. But now the arbitrator of despairs, Just death, kind umpire of men's miseries, With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence: I would his troubles likewise were expired, That so he might recover what was lost.
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck, And in his bosom spend my latter gasp: O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks, That I may kindly give one fainting kiss. And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock, Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised?
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm; And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease. This day, in argument upon a case, Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me; Among which terms he used his lavish tongue And did upbraid me with my father's death: Which obloquy set bars before my tongue, Else with the like I had requited him. Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake, In honour of a true Plantagenet And for alliance sake, declare the cause My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
That cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd me And hath detain'd me all my flowering youth Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine, Was cursed instrument of his decease.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Discover more at large what cause that was,For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
I will, if that my fading breath permit And death approach not ere my tale be done. Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king, Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son, The first-begotten and the lawful heir, Of Edward king, the third of that descent: During whose reign the Percies of the north, Finding his usurpation most unjust, Endeavor'd my advancement to the throne: The reason moved these warlike lords to this Was, for that—young King Richard thus removed, Leaving no heir begotten of his body— I was the next by birth and parentage; For by my mother I derived am From Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son To King Edward the Third; whereas he From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree, Being but fourth of that heroic line. But mark: as in this haughty attempt They laboured to plant the rightful heir, I lost my liberty and they their lives. Long after this, when Henry the Fifth, Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign, Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York, Marrying my sister that thy mother was, Again in pity of my hard distress Levied an army, weening to redeem And have install'd me in the diadem: But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers, In whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.
Of which, my lord, your honour is the last.
True; and thou seest that I no issue have And that my fainting words do warrant death; Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather: But yet be wary in thy studious care.
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:But yet, methinks, my father's executionWas nothing less than bloody tyranny.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With silence, nephew, be thou politic: Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster, And like a mountain, not to be removed. But now thy uncle is removing hence: As princes do their courts, when they are cloy'd With long continuance in a settled place.
O, uncle, would some part of my young yearsMight but redeem the passage of your age!
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth Which giveth many wounds when one will kill. Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good; Only give order for my funeral: And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul! In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage And like a hermit overpass'd thy days. Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast; And what I do imagine let that rest. Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself Will see his burial better than his life.
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer, Choked with ambition of the meaner sort: And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries, Which Somerset hath offer'd to my house: I doubt not but with honour to redress; And therefore haste I to the parliament, Either to be restored to my blood, Or make my ill the advantage of my good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Comest thou with deep premeditated lines, With written pamphlets studiously devised, Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse, Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge, Do it without invention, suddenly; As I with sudden and extemporal speech Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience, Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me. Think not, although in writing I preferr'd The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes, That therefore I have forged, or am not able Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen: No, prelate; such is thy audacious wickedness, Thy lewd, pestiferous and dissentious pranks, As very infants prattle of thy pride. Thou art a most pernicious usurer, Forward by nature, enemy to peace; Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems A man of thy profession and degree; And for thy treachery, what's more manifest? In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life, As well at London bridge as at the Tower. Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted, The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe To give me hearing what I shall reply. If I were covetous, ambitious or perverse, As he will have me, how am I so poor? Or how haps it I seek not to advance Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling? And for dissension, who preferreth peace More than I do?—except I be provoked. No, my good lords, it is not that offends; It is not that that hath incensed the duke: It is, because no one should sway but he; No one but he should be about the king; And that engenders thunder in his breast And makes him roar these accusations forth. But he shall know I am as good—
As good!Thou bastard of my grandfather!
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,But one imperious in another's throne?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Am I not protector, saucy priest?
And am not I a prelate of the church?
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keepsAnd useth it to patronage his theft.
Unreverent Gloucester!
Thou art reverentTouching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rome shall remedy this.
Roam thither, then.
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religiousAnd know the office that belongs to such.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Methinks his lordship should be humbler;it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
Yes, when his holy state is touch'd so near.
State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?Is not his grace protector to the king?
[Aside] Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue, Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should; Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?' Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester, The special watchmen of our English weal, I would prevail, if prayers might prevail, To join your hearts in love and amity. O, what a scandal is it to our crown, That two such noble peers as ye should jar! Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell Civil dissension is a viperous worm That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What tumult's this?
An uproar, I dare warrant,Begun through malice of the bishop's men.
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry, Pity the city of London, pity us! The bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men, Forbidden late to carry any weapon, Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones And banding themselves in contrary parts Do pelt so fast at one another's pate That many have their giddy brains knock'd out: Our windows are broke down in every street And we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
Nay, if we be forbidden stones,We'll fall to it with our teeth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.
You of my household, leave this peevish broilAnd set this unaccustom'd fight aside.
My lord, we know your grace to be a man Just and upright; and, for your royal birth, Inferior to none but to his majesty: And ere that we will suffer such a prince, So kind a father of the commonweal, To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate, We and our wives and children all will fight And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
Ay, and the very parings of our nailsShall pitch a field when we are dead.
Stay, stay, I say!And if you love me, as you say you do,Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, how this discord doth afflict my soul! Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold My sighs and tears and will not once relent? Who should be pitiful, if you be not? Or who should study to prefer a peace. If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
Yield, my lord protector; yield, Winchester; Except you mean with obstinate repulse To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm. You see what mischief and what murder too Hath been enacted through your enmity; Then be at peace except ye thirst for blood.
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Compassion on the king commands me stoop;Or I would see his heart out, ere the priestShould ever get that privilege of me.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the duke Hath banish'd moody discontented fury, As by his smoothed brows it doth appear: Why look you still so stern and tragical?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach That malice was a great and grievous sin; And will not you maintain the thing you teach, But prove a chief offender in the same?
Sweet king! the bishop hath a kindly gird.For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent!What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
[Aside] Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.— See here, my friends and loving countrymen, This token serveth for a flag of truce Betwixt ourselves and all our followers: So help me God, as I dissemble not!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] So help me God, as I intend it not!
O, loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester, How joyful am I made by this contract! Away, my masters! trouble us no more; But join in friendship, as your lords have done.
I'll to the surgeon's.
And so will I.
And I will see what physic the tavern affords.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,Which in the right of Richard PlantagenetWe do exhibit to your majesty.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: or sweet prince, And if your grace mark every circumstance, You have great reason to do Richard right; Especially for those occasions At Eltham Place I told your majesty.
And those occasions, uncle, were of force:Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure isThat Richard be restored to his blood.
Let Richard be restored to his blood;So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If Richard will be true, not that alone But all the whole inheritance I give That doth belong unto the house of York, From whence you spring by lineal descent.
Thy humble servant vows obedienceAnd humble service till the point of death.
Stoop then and set your knee against my foot; And, in reguerdon of that duty done, I gird thee with the valiant sword of York: Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet, And rise created princely Duke of York.
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!And as my duty springs, so perish theyThat grudge one thought against your majesty!
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!
Now will it best avail your majesty To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France: The presence of a king engenders love Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends, As it disanimates his enemies.
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes;For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
Your ships already are in readiness.
Ay, we may march in England or in France, Not seeing what is likely to ensue. This late dissension grown betwixt the peers Burns under feigned ashes of forged love And will at last break out into a flame: As fester'd members rot but by degree, Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away, So will this base and envious discord breed. And now I fear that fatal prophecy Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth Was in the mouth of every sucking babe; That Henry born at Monmouth should win all And Henry born at Windsor lose all: Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish His days may finish ere that hapless time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen, Through which our policy must make a breach: Take heed, be wary how you place your words; Talk like the vulgar sort of market men That come to gather money for their corn. If we have entrance, as I hope we shall, And that we find the slothful watch but weak, I'll by a sign give notice to our friends, That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,And we be lords and rulers over Rouen;Therefore we'll knock.
[Within] Qui est la?
Paysans, pauvres gens de France;Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.
Enter, go in; the market bell is rung.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Rouen, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.
Here enter'd Pucelle and her practisants;Now she is there, how will she specifyWhere is the best and safest passage in?
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower;Which, once discern'd, shows that her meaning is,No way to that, for weakness, which she enter'd.
Behold, this is the happy wedding torchThat joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,But burning fatal to the Talbotites!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;The burning torch in yonder turret stands.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,And then do execution on the watch.
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears, If Talbot but survive thy treachery. Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress, Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares, That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
Good morrow, gallants! want ye corn for bread? I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast Before he'll buy again at such a rate: 'Twas full of darnel; do you like the taste?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!I trust ere long to choke thee with thine ownAnd make thee curse the harvest of that corn.
Your grace may starve perhaps before that time.
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!
What will you do, good grey-beard? break a lance,And run a tilt at death within a chair?
Foul fiend of France, and hag of all despite, Encompass'd with thy lustful paramours! Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age And twit with cowardice a man half dead? Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again, Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace;If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
God speed the parliament! who shall be the speaker?
Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,To try if that our own be ours or no.
I speak not to that railing Hecate,But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest;Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signior, no.
Signior, hang! base muleters of France!Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the wallsAnd dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
Away, captains! let's get us from the walls; For Talbot means no goodness by his looks. God be wi' you, my lord! we came but to tell you That we are here.
And there will we be too, ere it be long, Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame! Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house, Prick'd on by public wrongs sustain'd in France, Either to get the town again or die: And I, as sure as English Henry lives And as his father here was conqueror, As sure as in this late-betrayed town Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried, So sure I swear to get the town or die.
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, ere we go, regard this dying prince, The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord, We will bestow you in some better place, Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me:Here will I sit before the walls of RouenAnd will be partner of your weal or woe.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.
Not to be gone from hence; for once I read That stout Pendragon in his litter sick Came to the field and vanquished his foes: Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts, Because I ever found them as myself.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast! Then be it so: heavens keep old Bedford safe! And now no more ado, brave Burgundy, But gather we our forces out of hand And set upon our boasting enemy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?
Whither away! to save myself by flight:We are like to have the overthrow again.
What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?
Ay,All the Talbots in the world, to save my life!
Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please, For I have seen our enemies' overthrow. What is the trust or strength of foolish man? They that of late were daring with their scoffs Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
Lost, and recover'd in a day again!This is a double honour, Burgundy:Yet heavens have glory for this victory!
Warlike and martial Talbot, BurgundyEnshrines thee in his heart and there erectsThy noble deeds as valour's monuments.
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now? I think her old familiar is asleep: Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks? What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief That such a valiant company are fled. Now will we take some order in the town, Placing therein some expert officers, And then depart to Paris to the king, For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But yet, before we go, let's not forget The noble Duke of Bedford late deceased, But see his exequies fulfill'd in Rouen: A braver soldier never couched lance, A gentler heart did never sway in court; But kings and mightiest potentates must die, For that's the end of human misery.
Dismay not, princes, at this accident, Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered: Care is no cure, but rather corrosive, For things that are not to be remedied. Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while And like a peacock sweep along his tail; We'll pull his plumes and take away his train, If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,And of thy cunning had no diffidence:One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,And we will make thee famous through the world.
We'll set thy statue in some holy place,And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint:Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise: By fair persuasions mix'd with sugar'd words We will entice the Duke of Burgundy To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that, France were no place for Henry's warriors; Nor should that nation boast it so with us, But be extirped from our provinces.
For ever should they be expulsed from FranceAnd not have title of an earldom here.
Your honours shall perceive how I will workTo bring this matter to the wished end.
Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceiveTheir powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,And all the troops of English after him.
Now in the rearward comes the duke and his:Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.Summon a parley; we will talk with him.
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say'st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France!Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
Speak on; but be not over-tedious.
Look on thy country, look on fertile France, And see the cities and the towns defaced By wasting ruin of the cruel foe. As looks the mother on her lowly babe When death doth close his tender dying eyes, See, see the pining malady of France; Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds, Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast. O, turn thy edged sword another way; Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help. One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore: Return thee therefore with a flood of tears, And wash away thy country's stained spots.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words,Or nature makes me suddenly relent.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee, Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny. Who joint'st thou with but with a lordly nation That will not trust thee but for profit's sake? When Talbot hath set footing once in France And fashion'd thee that instrument of ill, Who then but English Henry will be lord And thou be thrust out like a fugitive? Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof, Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe? And was he not in England prisoner? But when they heard he was thine enemy, They set him free without his ransom paid, In spite of Burgundy and all his friends. See, then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen And joint'st with them will be thy slaughtermen. Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord: Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
I am vanquished; these haughty words of hers Have batter'd me like roaring cannon-shot, And made me almost yield upon my knees. Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen, And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace: My forces and my power of men are yours: So farewell, Talbot; I'll no longer trust thee.
[Aside] Done like a Frenchman: turn, and turn again!
Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And doth beget new courage in our breasts.
Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
My gracious prince, and honourable peers, Hearing of your arrival in this realm, I have awhile given truce unto my wars, To do my duty to my sovereign: In sign, whereof, this arm, that hath reclaim'd To your obedience fifty fortresses, Twelve cities and seven walled towns of strength, Beside five hundred prisoners of esteem, Lets fall his sword before your highness' feet, And with submissive loyalty of heart Ascribes the glory of his conquest got First to my God and next unto your grace.
Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,That hath so long been resident in France?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord! When I was young, as yet I am not old, I do remember how my father said A stouter champion never handled sword. Long since we were resolved of your truth, Your faithful service and your toil in war; Yet never have you tasted our reward, Or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks, Because till now we never saw your face: Therefore, stand up; and, for these good deserts, We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury; And in our coronation take your place.
Now, sir, to you, that were so hot at sea, Disgracing of these colours that I wear In honour of my noble Lord of York: Darest thou maintain the former words thou spakest?
Yes, sir; as well as you dare patronageThe envious barking of your saucy tongueAgainst my lord the Duke of Somerset.
Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, what is he? as good a man as York.
Hark ye; not so: in witness, take ye that.
Villain, thou know'st the law of arms is such That whoso draws a sword, 'tis present death, Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood. But I'll unto his majesty, and crave I may have liberty to venge this wrong; When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you;And, after, meet you sooner than you would.
Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save King Henry, of that name the sixth!
Now, governor of Paris, take your oath, That you elect no other king but him; Esteem none friends but such as are his friends, And none your foes but such as shall pretend Malicious practises against his state: This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais, To haste unto your coronation, A letter was deliver'd to my hands, Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next,To tear the garter from thy craven's leg,
Which I have done, because unworthily Thou wast installed in that high degree. Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest This dastard, at the battle of Patay, When but in all I was six thousand strong And that the French were almost ten to one, Before we met or that a stroke was given, Like to a trusty squire did run away: In which assault we lost twelve hundred men; Myself and divers gentlemen beside Were there surprised and taken prisoners . Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss; Or whether that such cowards ought to wear This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To say the truth, this fact was infamousAnd ill beseeming any common man,Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.
When first this order was ordain'd, my lords, Knights of the garter were of noble birth, Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage, Such as were grown to credit by the wars; Not fearing death, nor shrinking for distress, But always resolute in most extremes. He then that is not furnish'd in this sort Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight, Profaning this most honourable order, And should, if I were worthy to be judge, Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom!Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.
And now, my lord protector, view the letterSent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.
What means his grace, that he hath changed his style? No more but, plain and bluntly, 'To the king!' Hath he forgot he is his sovereign? Or doth this churlish superscription Pretend some alteration in good will? What's here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'I have, upon especial cause, Moved with compassion of my country's wreck, Together with the pitiful complaints Of such as your oppression feeds upon, Forsaken your pernicious faction And join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.' O monstrous treachery! can this be so, That in alliance, amity and oaths, There should be found such false dissembling guile?
What! doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with himAnd give him chastisement for this abuse.How say you, my lord? are you not content?
Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented,I should have begg'd I might have been employ'd.
Then gather strength and march unto him straight:Let him perceive how ill we brook his treasonAnd what offence it is to flout his friends.
I go, my lord, in heart desiring stillYou may behold confusion of your foes.
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.
And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.
Be patient, lords; and give them leave to speak.Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim?And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom?
With him, my lord; for he hath done me wrong.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I with him; for he hath done me wrong.
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?First let me know, and then I'll answer you.
Crossing the sea from England into France, This fellow here, with envious carping tongue, Upbraided me about the rose I wear; Saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves Did represent my master's blushing cheeks, When stubbornly he did repugn the truth About a certain question in the law Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him; With other vile and ignominious terms: In confutation of which rude reproach And in defence of my lord's worthiness, I crave the benefit of law of arms.
And that is my petition, noble lord: For though he seem with forged quaint conceit To set a gloss upon his bold intent, Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him; And he first took exceptions at this badge, Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower Bewray'd the faintness of my master's heart.
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men, When for so slight and frivolous a cause Such factious emulations shall arise! Good cousins both, of York and Somerset, Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,And then your highness shall command a peace.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.
Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife! And perish ye, with your audacious prate! Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed With this immodest clamorous outrage To trouble and disturb the king and us? And you, my lords, methinks you do not well To bear with their perverse objections; Much less to take occasion from their mouths To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves: Let me persuade you take a better course.
It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.
Come hither, you that would be combatants: Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour, Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause. And you, my lords, remember where we are, In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation: If they perceive dissension in our looks And that within ourselves we disagree, How will their grudging stomachs be provoked To wilful disobedience, and rebel! Beside, what infamy will there arise, When foreign princes shall be certified That for a toy, a thing of no regard, King Henry's peers and chief nobility Destroy'd themselves, and lost the realm of France! O, think upon the conquest of my father, My tender years, and let us not forego That for a trifle that was bought with blood Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife. I see no reason, if I wear this rose,
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That any one should therefore be suspicious I more incline to Somerset than York: Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both: As well they may upbraid me with my crown, Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crown'd. But your discretions better can persuade Than I am able to instruct or teach: And therefore, as we hither came in peace, So let us still continue peace and love. Cousin of York, we institute your grace To be our regent in these parts of France: And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot; And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors, Go cheerfully together and digest. Your angry choler on your enemies. Ourself, my lord protector and the rest After some respite will return to Calais; From thence to England; where I hope ere long To be presented, by your victories, With Charles, Alencon and that traitorous rout.
My Lord of York, I promise you, the kingPrettily, methought, did play the orator.
And so he did; but yet I like it not,In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not;I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.
An if I wist he did,—but let it rest;Other affairs must now be managed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice; For, had the passions of thy heart burst out, I fear we should have seen decipher'd there More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils, Than yet can be imagined or supposed. But howsoe'er, no simple man that sees This jarring discord of nobility, This shouldering of each other in the court, This factious bandying of their favourites, But that it doth presage some ill event. 'Tis much when sceptres are in children's hands; But more when envy breeds unkind division; There comes the rain, there begins confusion.
Go to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter:Summon their general unto the wall.
English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth, Servant in arms to Harry King of England; And thus he would: Open your city gates; Be humble to us; call my sovereign yours, And do him homage as obedient subjects; And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power: But, if you frown upon this proffer'd peace, You tempt the fury of my three attendants, Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire; Who in a moment even with the earth Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers, If you forsake the offer of their love.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death, Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge! The period of thy tyranny approacheth. On us thou canst not enter but by death; For, I protest, we are well fortified And strong enough to issue out and fight: If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed, Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee: On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd, To wall thee from the liberty of flight; And no way canst thou turn thee for redress, But death doth front thee with apparent spoil And pale destruction meets thee in the face. Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacrament To rive their dangerous artillery Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot. Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man, Of an invincible unconquer'd spirit! This is the latest glory of thy praise That I, thy enemy, due thee withal; For ere the glass, that now begins to run, Finish the process of his sandy hour, These eyes, that see thee now well coloured, Shall see thee wither'd, bloody, pale and dead.
Hark! hark! the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul;And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He fables not; I hear the enemy: Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings. O, negligent and heedless discipline! How are we park'd and bounded in a pale, A little herd of England's timorous deer, Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs! If we be English deer, be then in blood; Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch, But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags , Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel And make the cowards stand aloof at bay: Sell every man his life as dear as mine, And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends. God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right, Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!
Are not the speedy scouts return'd again,That dogg'd the mighty army of the Dauphin?
They are return'd, my lord, and give it out That he is march'd to Bourdeaux with his power, To fight with Talbot: as he march'd along, By your espials were discovered Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led, Which join'd with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.
A plague upon that villain Somerset, That thus delays my promised supply Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege! Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid, And I am lowted by a traitor villain And cannot help the noble chevalier: God comfort him in this necessity! If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.
Thou princely leader of our English strength, Never so needful on the earth of France, Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot, Who now is girdled with a waist of iron And hemm'd about with grim destruction: To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York! Else, farewell Talbot, France, and England's honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place! So should we save a valiant gentleman By forfeiting a traitor and a coward. Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep, That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.
O, send some succor to the distress'd lord!
He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get;All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul; And on his son young John, who two hours since I met in travel toward his warlike father! This seven years did not Talbot see his son; And now they meet where both their lives are done.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have To bid his young son welcome to his grave? Away! vexation almost stops my breath, That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death. Lucy, farewell; no more my fortune can, But curse the cause I cannot aid the man. Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away, 'Long all of Somerset and his delay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus, while the vulture of sedition Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders, Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror, That ever living man of memory, Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross, Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss.
It is too late; I cannot send them now: This expedition was by York and Talbot Too rashly plotted: all our general force Might with a sally of the very town Be buckled with: the over-daring Talbot Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure: York set him on to fight and die in shame, That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with meSet from our o'ermatch'd forces forth for aid.
How now, Sir William! whither were you sent?
Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot; Who, ring'd about with bold adversity, Cries out for noble York and Somerset, To beat assailing death from his weak legions: And whiles the honourable captain there Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs, And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue, You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honour, Keep off aloof with worthless emulation. Let not your private discord keep away The levied succors that should lend him aid, While he, renowned noble gentleman, Yields up his life unto a world of odds: Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy, Alencon, Reignier, compass him about, And Talbot perisheth by your default.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]York set him on; York should have sent him aid.
And York as fast upon your grace exclaims;Swearing that you withhold his levied host,Collected for this expedition.
York lies; he might have sent and had the horse;I owe him little duty, and less love;And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France, Hath now entrapp'd the noble-minded Talbot: Never to England shall he bear his life; But dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.
Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight:Within six hours they will be at his aid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Too late comes rescue: he is ta'en or slain;For fly he could not, if he would have fled;And fly would Talbot never, though he might.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
O young John Talbot! I did send for thee To tutor thee in stratagems of war, That Talbot's name might be in thee revived When sapless age and weak unable limbs Should bring thy father to his drooping c hair. But, O malignant and ill-boding stars! Now thou art come unto a feast of death, A terrible and unavoided danger: Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse; And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape By sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? and am I your son? And shall I fly? O if you love my mother, Dishonour not her honourable name, To make a bastard and a slave of me! The world will say, he is not Talbot's blood, That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.
He that flies so will ne'er return again.
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.
Then let me stay; and, father, do you fly: Your loss is great, so your regard should be; My worth unknown, no loss is known in me. Upon my death the French can little boast; In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost. Flight cannot stain the honour you have won; But mine it will, that no exploit have done: You fled for vantage, everyone will swear; But, if I bow, they'll say it was for fear. There is no hope that ever I will stay, If the first hour I shrink and run away. Here on my knee I beg mortality, Rather than life preserved with infamy.
Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
Upon my blessing, I command thee go.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.
No part of him but will be shame in me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?
Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.If death be so apparent, then both fly.
And leave my followers here to fight and die?My age was never tainted with such shame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And shall my youth be guilty of such blame? No more can I be sever'd from your side, Than can yourself yourself in twain divide: Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I; For live I will not, if my father die.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son, Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon. Come, side by side together live and die. And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.
Saint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight. The regent hath with Talbot broke his word And left us to the rage of France his sword. Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath; I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son! The life thou gavest me first was lost and done, Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late, To my determined time thou gavest new date.
When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire, It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desire Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age, Quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage, Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy, And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee. The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood Of thy first fight, I soon encountered, And interchanging blows I quickly shed Some of his bastard blood; and in disgrace Bespoke him thus; 'Contaminated, base And misbegotten blood I spill of thine, Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:' Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy, Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care, Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare? Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly, Now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry? Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead: The help of one stands me in little stead. O, too much folly is it, well I wot, To hazard all our lives in one small boat! If I to-day die not with Frenchmen's rage, To-morrow I shall die with mickle age: By me they nothing gain an if I stay; 'Tis but the shortening of my life one day: In thee thy mother dies, our household's name, My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame: All these and more we hazard by thy stay; All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart; These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart: On that advantage, bought with such a shame, To save a paltry life and slay bright fame, Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly, The coward horse that bears me fail and die! And like me to the peasant boys of France, To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance! Surely, by all the glory you have won, An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son: Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot; If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.
Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete, Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet: If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side; And, commendable proved, let's die in pride.
Where is my other life? mine own is gone; O, where's young Talbot? where is valiant John? Triumphant death, smear'd with captivity, Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee: When he perceived me shrink and on my knee, His bloody sword he brandish'd over me, And, like a hungry lion, did commence Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience; But when my angry guardant stood alone, Tendering my ruin and assail'd of none, Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart Suddenly made him from my side to start Into the clustering battle of the French; And in that sea of blood my boy did drench His over-mounting spirit, and there died, My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.
O, my dear lord, lo, where your son is borne!
Thou antic death, which laugh'st us here to scorn, Anon, from thy insulting tyranny, Coupled in bonds of perpetuity, Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky, In thy despite shall 'scape mortality. O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour'd death, Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath! Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no; Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe. Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say, Had death been French, then death had died to-day. Come, come and lay him in his father's arms: My spirit can no longer bear these harms. Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have, Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,We should have found a bloody day of this.
How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging-wood,Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!
Once I encounter'd him, and thus I said: 'Thou maiden youth, be vanquish'd by a maid:' But, with a proud majestical high scorn, He answer'd thus: 'Young Talbot was not born To be the pillage of a giglot wench:' So, rushing in the bowels of the French, He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight;See, where he lies inhearsed in the armsOf the most bloody nurser of his harms!
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunderWhose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, no, forbear! for that which we have fledDuring the life, let us not wrong it dead.
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.
On what submissive message art thou sent?
Submission, Dauphin! 'tis a mere French word; We English warriors wot not what it means. I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'en And to survey the bodies of the dead.
For prisoners ask'st thou? hell our prison is.But tell me whom thou seek'st.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But where's the great Alcides of the field, Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, Created, for his rare success in arms, Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence; Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield, Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton, Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield, The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge; Knight of the noble order of Saint George, Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece; Great marshal to Henry the Sixth Of all his wars within the realm of France?
Here is a silly stately style indeed! The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath, Writes not so tedious a style as this. Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen's only scourge, Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis? O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd, That I in rage might shoot them at your faces! O, that I could but call these dead to life! It were enough to fright the realm of France: Were but his picture left amongst you here, It would amaze the proudest of you all. Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence And give them burial as beseems their worth.
I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost, He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit. For God's sake let him have 'em; to keep them here, They would but stink, and putrefy the air.
Go, take their bodies hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll bear them hence; but from their ashes shall be rear'dA phoenix that shall make all France afeard.
So we be rid of them, do with 'em what thou wilt.And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
Have you perused the letters from the pope,The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac?
I have, my lord: and their intent is this: They humbly sue unto your excellence To have a godly peace concluded of Between the realms of England and of France.
How doth your grace affect their motion?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, my good lord; and as the only meansTo stop effusion of our Christian bloodAnd 'stablish quietness on every side.
Ay, marry, uncle; for I always thought It was both impious and unnatural That such immanity and bloody strife Should reign among professors of one faith.
Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect And surer bind this knot of amity, The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles, A man of great authority in France, Proffers his only daughter to your grace In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young! And fitter is my study and my books Than wanton dalliance with a paramour. Yet call the ambassador; and, as you please, So let them have their answers every one: I shall be well content with any choice Tends to God's glory and my country's weal.
What! is my Lord of Winchester install'd, And call'd unto a cardinal's degree? Then I perceive that will be verified Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy, 'If once he come to be a cardinal, He'll make his cap co-equal with the crown.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lords ambassadors, your several suits Have been consider'd and debated on. And therefore are we certainly resolved To draw conditions of a friendly peace; Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean Shall be transported presently to France.
And for the proffer of my lord your master, I have inform'd his highness so at large As liking of the lady's virtuous gifts, Her beauty and the value of her dower, He doth intend she shall be England's queen.
In argument and proof of which contract, Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection. And so, my lord protector, see them guarded And safely brought to Dover; where inshipp'd Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive The sum of money which I promised Should be deliver'd to his holiness For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
I will attend upon your lordship's leisure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Now Winchester will not submit, I trow, Or be inferior to the proudest peer. Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive That, neither in birth or for authority, The bishop will be overborne by thee: I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee, Or sack this country with a mutiny.
These news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits:'Tis said the stout Parisians do revoltAnd turn again unto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us;Else, ruin combat with their palaces!
Success unto our valiant general,And happiness to his accomplices!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.
The English army, that divided wasInto two parties, is now conjoined in one,And means to give you battle presently.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is;But we will presently provide for them.
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there:Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then on, my lords; and France be fortunate!
The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly. Now help, ye charming spells and periapts; And ye choice spirits that admonish me And give me signs of future accidents.
You speedy helpers, that are substitutesUnder the lordly monarch of the north,Appear and aid me in this enterprise.
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof Of your accustom'd diligence to me. Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd Out of the powerful regions under earth, Help me this once, that France may get the field.
O, hold me not with silence over-long! Where I was wont to feed you with my blood, I'll lop a member off and give it you In earnest of further benefit, So you do condescend to help me now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No hope to have redress? My body shallPay recompense, if you will grant my suit.
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice Entreat you to your wonted furtherance? Then take my soul, my body, soul and all, Before that England give the French the foil.
See, they forsake me! Now the time is come That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest And let her head fall into England's lap. My ancient incantations are too weak, And hell too strong for me to buckle with: Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast: Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms And try if they can gain your liberty. A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace! See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows, As if with Circe she would change my shape!
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man;No shape but his can please your dainty eye.
A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee!And may ye both be suddenly surprisedBy bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!
Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue!
I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.
Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly! For I will touch thee but with reverent hands; I kiss these fingers for eternal peace, And lay them gently on thy tender side. Who art thou? say, that I may honour thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd. Be not offended, nature's miracle, Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me: So doth the swan her downy cygnets save, Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings. Yet, if this servile usage once offend. Go, and be free again, as Suffolk's friend.
O, stay! I have no power to let her pass; My hand would free her, but my heart says no As plays the sun upon the glassy streams, Twinkling another counterfeited beam, So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes. Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak: I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind. Fie, de la Pole! disable not thyself; Hast not a tongue? is she not here? Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight? Ay, beauty's princely majesty is such, Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, Earl of Suffolk—if thy name be so—What ransom must I pay before I pass?For I perceive I am thy prisoner.
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,Before thou make a trial of her love?
Why speak'st thou not? what ransom must I pay?
She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd;She is a woman, therefore to be won.
Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife;Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.
There all is marr'd; there lies a cooling card.
He talks at random; sure, the man is mad.
And yet a dispensation may be had.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And yet I would that you would answer me.
I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing!
He talks of wood: it is some carpenter.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied, And peace established between these realms But there remains a scruple in that too; For though her father be the King of Naples, Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor, And our nobility will scorn the match.
Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight,And will not any way dishonour me.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French;And then I need not crave his courtesy.
Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.
Say, gentle princess, would you not supposeYour bondage happy, to be made a queen?
To be a queen in bondage is more vileThan is a slave in base servility;For princes should be free.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And so shall you,If happy England's royal king be free.
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen, To put a golden sceptre in thy hand And set a precious crown upon thy head, If thou wilt condescend to be my—
What?
His love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.
No, gentle madam; I unworthy am To woo so fair a dame to be his wife, And have no portion in the choice myself. How say you, madam, are ye so content?
An if my father please, I am content.
Then call our captains and our colours forth.And, madam, at your father's castle wallsWe'll crave a parley, to confer with him.
See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To whom?
To me.
Suffolk, what remedy?I am a soldier, and unapt to weep,Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord: Consent, and for thy honour give consent, Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king; Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto; And this her easy-held imprisonment Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fair Margaret knowsThat Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.
Upon thy princely warrant, I descendTo give thee answer of thy just demand.
And here I will expect thy coming.
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories:Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,Fit to be made companion with a king:What answer makes your grace unto my suit?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth To be the princely bride of such a lord; Upon condition I may quietly Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou, Free from oppression or the stroke of war, My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.
That is her ransom; I deliver her;And those two counties I will undertakeYour grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
And I again, in Henry's royal name,As deputy unto that gracious king,Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks, Because this is in traffic of a king.[Aside] And yet, methinks, I could be well contentTo be mine own attorney in this case.I'll over then to England with this news,And make this marriage to be solemnized.So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safeIn golden palaces, as it becomes.
I do embrace thee, as I would embraceThe Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayersShall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret;No princely commendations to my king?
Such commendations as becomes a maid,A virgin and his servant, say to him.
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.But madam, I must trouble you again;No loving token to his majesty?
Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart,Never yet taint with love, I send the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And this withal.
That for thyself: I will not so presumeTo send such peevish tokens to a king.
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay; Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth; There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk. Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise: Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount, And natural graces that extinguish art; Repeat their semblance often on the seas, That, when thou comest to kneel at Henry's feet, Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
Bring forth that sorceress condemn'd to burn.
Ah, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright! Have I sought every country far and near, And, now it is my chance to find thee out, Must I behold thy timeless cruel death? Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Decrepit miser! base ignoble wretch!I am descended of a gentler blood:Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so; I did beget her, all the parish knows: Her mother liveth yet, can testify She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.
Graceless! wilt thou deny thy parentage?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle! God knows thou art a collop of my flesh; And for thy sake have I shed many a tear: Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn'd this man,Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest The morn that I was wedded to her mother. Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl. Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time Of thy nativity! I would the milk Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast, Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake! Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field, I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee! Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab? O, burn her, burn her! hanging is too good.
Take her away; for she hath lived too long,To fill the world with vicious qualities.
First, let me tell you whom you have condemn'd: Not me begotten of a shepherd swain, But issued from the progeny of kings; Virtuous and holy; chosen from above, By inspiration of celestial grace, To work exceeding miracles on earth. I never had to do with wicked spirits: But you, that are polluted with your lusts, Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents, Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices, Because you want the grace that others have, You judge it straight a thing impossible To compass wonders but by help of devils. No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been A virgin from her tender infancy, Chaste and immaculate in very thought; Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused, Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
Ay, ay: away with her to execution!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And hark ye, sirs; because she is a maid, Spare for no faggots, let there be enow: Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake, That so her torture may be shortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts? Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity, That warranteth by law to be thy privilege. I am with child, ye bloody homicides: Murder not then the fruit within my womb, Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!
The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
She and the Dauphin have been juggling:I did imagine what would be her refuge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, go to; we'll have no bastards live;Especially since Charles must father it.
You are deceived; my child is none of his:It was Alencon that enjoy'd my love.
Alencon! that notorious Machiavel!It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.
O, give me leave, I have deluded you:'Twas neither Charles nor yet the duke I named,But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevail'd.
A married man! that's most intolerable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well,There were so many, whom she may accuse.
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee:Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Then lead me hence; with whom I leave my curse: May never glorious sun reflex his beams Upon the country where you make abode; But darkness and the gloomy shade of death Environ you, till mischief and despair Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!
Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,Thou foul accursed minister of hell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lord regent, I do greet your excellence With letters of commission from the king. For know, my lords, the states of Christendom, Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils, Have earnestly implored a general peace Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French; And here at hand the Dauphin and his train Approacheth, to confer about some matter.
Is all our travail turn'd to this effect? After the slaughter of so many peers, So many captains, gentlemen and soldiers, That in this quarrel have been overthrown And sold their bodies for their country's benefit, Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace? Have we not lost most part of all the towns, By treason, falsehood and by treachery, Our great progenitors had conquered? O Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with grief The utter loss of all the realm of France.
Be patient, York: if we conclude a peace,It shall be with such strict and severe covenantsAs little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France, We come to be informed by yourselves What the conditions of that league must be.
Speak, Winchester; for boiling choler chokesThe hollow passage of my poison'd voice,By sight of these our baleful enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus: That, in regard King Henry gives consent, Of mere compassion and of lenity, To ease your country of distressful war, And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace, You shall become true liegemen to his crown: And Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear To pay him tribute, submit thyself, Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him, And still enjoy thy regal dignity.
Must he be then as shadow of himself? Adorn his temples with a coronet, And yet, in substance and authority, Retain but privilege of a private man? This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
'Tis known already that I am possess'd With more than half the Gallian territories, And therein reverenced for their lawful king: Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd, Detract so much from that prerogative, As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole? No, lord ambassador, I'll rather keep That which I have than, coveting for more, Be cast from possibility of all.
Insulting Charles! hast thou by secret means Used intercession to obtain a league, And, now the matter grows to compromise, Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison? Either accept the title thou usurp'st, Of benefit proceeding from our king And not of any challenge of desert, Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy To cavil in the course of this contract: If once it be neglected, ten to one We shall not find like opportunity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To say the truth, it is your policy To save your subjects from such massacre And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen By our proceeding in hostility; And therefore take this compact of a truce, Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
How say'st thou, Charles? shall our condition stand?
It shall;Only reserved, you claim no interestIn any of our towns of garrison.
Then swear allegiance to his majesty, As thou art knight, never to disobey Nor be rebellious to the crown of England, Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England. So, now dismiss your army when ye please: Hang up your ensign, let your drums be still, For here we entertain a solemn peace.
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl, Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish'd me: Her virtues graced with external gifts Do breed love's settled passions in my heart: And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide, So am I driven by breath of her renown Either to suffer shipwreck or arrive Where I may have fruition of her love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale Is but a preface of her worthy praise; The chief perfections of that lovely dame Had I sufficient skill to utter them, Would make a volume of enticing lines, Able to ravish any dull conceit: And, which is more, she is not so divine, So full-replete with choice of all delights, But with as humble lowliness of mind She is content to be at your command; Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents, To love and honour Henry as her lord.
And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.Therefore, my lord protector, give consentThat Margaret may be England's royal queen.
So should I give consent to flatter sin. You know, my lord, your highness is betroth'd Unto another lady of esteem: How shall we then dispense with that contract, And not deface your honour with reproach?
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths; Or one that, at a triumph having vow'd To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists By reason of his adversary's odds: A poor earl's daughter is unequal odds, And therefore may be broke without offence.
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?Her father is no better than an earl,Although in glorious titles he excel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, lord, her father is a king, The King of Naples and Jerusalem; And of such great authority in France As his alliance will confirm our peace And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.
Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.
A dower, my lords! disgrace not so your king, That he should be so abject, base and poor, To choose for wealth and not for perfect love. Henry is able to enrich his queen And not seek a queen to make him rich: So worthless peasants bargain for their wives, As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse. Marriage is a matter of more worth Than to be dealt in by attorneyship; Not whom we will, but whom his grace affects, Must be companion of his nuptial bed: And therefore, lords, since he affects her most, It most of all these reasons bindeth us, In our opinions she should be preferr'd. For what is wedlock forced but a hell, An age of discord and continual strife? Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss, And is a pattern of celestial peace. Whom should we match with Henry, being a king, But Margaret, that is daughter to a king? Her peerless feature, joined with her birth, Approves her fit for none but for a king: Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit, More than in women commonly is seen, Will answer our hope in issue of a king; For Henry, son unto a conqueror, Is likely to beget more conquerors, If with a lady of so high resolve As is fair Margaret he be link'd in love. Then yield, my lords; and here conclude with me That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.
Whether it be through force of your report, My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that My tender youth was never yet attaint With any passion of inflaming love, I cannot tell; but this I am assured, I feel such sharp dissension in my breast, Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear, As I am sick with working of my thoughts. Take, therefore, shipping; post, my lord, to France; Agree to any covenants, and procure That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come To cross the seas to England and be crown'd King Henry's faithful and anointed queen: For your expenses and sufficient charge, Among the people gather up a tenth. Be gone, I say; for, till you do return, I rest perplexed with a thousand cares. And you, good uncle, banish all offence: If you do censure me by what you were, Not what you are, I know it will excuse This sudden execution of my will. And so, conduct me where, from company, I may revolve and ruminate my grief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.
Thus Suffolk hath prevail'd; and thus he goes, As did the youthful Paris once to Greece, With hope to find the like event in love, But prosper better than the Trojan did. Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the king; But I will rule both her, the king and realm.
As by your high imperial majesty I had in charge at my depart for France, As procurator to your excellence, To marry Princess Margaret for your grace, So, in the famous ancient city, Tours, In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil, The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne and Alencon, Seven earls, twelve barons and twenty reverend bishops, I have perform'd my task and was espoused: And humbly now upon my bended knee, In sight of England and her lordly peers, Deliver up my title in the queen To your most gracious hands, that are the substance Of that great shadow I did represent; The happiest gift that ever marquess gave, The fairest queen that ever king received.
Suffolk, arise. Welcome, Queen Margaret: I can express no kinder sign of love Than this kind kiss. O Lord, that lends me life, Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness! For thou hast given me in this beauteous face A world of earthly blessings to my soul, If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.
Great King of England and my gracious lord, The mutual conference that my mind hath had, By day, by night, waking and in my dreams, In courtly company or at my beads, With you, mine alder-liefest sovereign, Makes me the bolder to salute my king With ruder terms, such as my wit affords And over-joy of heart doth minister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her sight did ravish; but her grace in speech, Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty, Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys; Such is the fulness of my heart's content. Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
[Kneeling] Long live Queen Margaret, England'shappiness!
We thank you all.
My lord protector, so it please your grace, Here are the articles of contracted peace Between our sovereign and the French king Charles, For eighteen months concluded by consent.
[Reads] 'Imprimis, it is agreed between the French king Charles, and William de la Pole, Marquess of Suffolk, ambassador for Henry King of England, that the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret, daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia and Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere the thirtieth of May next ensuing. Item, that the duchy of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be released and delivered to the king her father'—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Uncle, how now!
Pardon me, gracious lord;Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heartAnd dimm'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray, read on.
[Reads] 'Item, It is further agreed between them, that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered over to the king her father, and she sent over of the King of England's own proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.'
They please us well. Lord marquess, kneel down: We here create thee the first duke of Suffolk, And gird thee with the sword. Cousin of York, We here discharge your grace from being regent I' the parts of France, till term of eighteen months Be full expired. Thanks, uncle Winchester, Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset, Salisbury, and Warwick; We thank you all for the great favour done, In entertainment to my princely queen. Come, let us in, and with all speed provide To see her coronation be perform'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brave peers of England, pillars of the state, To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief, Your grief, the common grief of all the land. What! Did my brother Henry spend his youth, His valour, coin and people, in the wars? Did he so often lodge in open field, In winter's cold and summer's parching heat, To conquer France, his true inheritance? And did my brother Bedford toil his wits, To keep by policy what Henry got? Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham, Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick, Received deep scars in France and Normandy? Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself, With all the learned council of the realm, Studied so long, sat in the council-house Early and late, debating to and fro How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe, And had his highness in his infancy Crowned in Paris in despite of foes? And shall these labours and these honours die? Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance, Your deeds of war and all our counsel die? O peers of England, shameful is this league! Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame, Blotting your names from books of memory, Razing the characters of your renown, Defacing monuments of conquer'd France, Undoing all, as all had never been!
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,This peroration with such circumstance?For France, 'tis ours; and we will keep it still.
Ay, uncle, we will keep it, if we can; But now it is impossible we should: Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast, Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,These counties were the keys of Normandy.But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?
For grief that they are past recovery: For, were there hope to conquer them again, My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears. Anjou and Maine! Myself did win them both; Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer: And are the cities, that I got with wounds, Delivered up again with peaceful words? Mort Dieu!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate, That dims the honour of this warlike isle! France should have torn and rent my very heart, Before I would have yielded to this league. I never read but England's kings have had Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives: And our King Henry gives away his own, To match with her that brings no vantages.
A proper jest, and never heard before,That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenthFor costs and charges in transporting her!She should have stayed in France and starvedin France, Before—
My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot:It was the pleasure of my lord the King.
My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind; 'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike, But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye. Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy face I see thy fury: if I longer stay, We shall begin our ancient bickerings. Lordings, farewell; and say, when I am gone, I prophesied France will be lost ere long.
So, there goes our protector in a rage. 'Tis known to you he is mine enemy, Nay, more, an enemy unto you all, And no great friend, I fear me, to the king. Consider, lords, he is the next of blood, And heir apparent to the English crown: Had Henry got an empire by his marriage, And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west, There's reason he should be displeased at it. Look to it, lords! Let not his smoothing words Bewitch your hearts; be wise and circumspect. What though the common people favour him, Calling him 'Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester,' Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice, 'Jesu maintain your royal excellence!' With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!' I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss, He will be found a dangerous protector.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why should he, then, protect our sovereign, He being of age to govern of himself? Cousin of Somerset, join you with me, And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk, We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.
This weighty business will not brook delay:I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride And greatness of his place be grief to us, Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal: His insolence is more intolerable Than all the princes in the land beside: If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be protector.
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be protector,Despite Duke Humphrey or the cardinal.
Pride went before, ambition follows him. While these do labour for their own preferment, Behoves it us to labour for the realm. I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester Did bear him like a noble gentleman. Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal, More like a soldier than a man o' the church, As stout and proud as he were lord of all, Swear like a ruffian and demean himself Unlike the ruler of a commonweal. Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age, Thy deeds, thy plainness and thy housekeeping, Hath won the greatest favour of the commons, Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey: And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland, In bringing them to civil discipline, Thy late exploits done in the heart of France, When thou wert regent for our sovereign, Have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people: Join we together, for the public good, In what we can, to bridle and suppress The pride of Suffolk and the cardinal, With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition; And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds, While they do tend the profit of the land.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So God help Warwick, as he loves the land,And common profit of his country!
[Aside] And so says York, for he hath greatest cause.
Then let's make haste away, and look unto the main.
Unto the main! O father, Maine is lost; That Maine which by main force Warwick did win, And would have kept so long as breath did last! Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine, Which I will win from France, or else be slain.
Anjou and Maine are given to the French; Paris is lost; the state of Normandy Stands on a tickle point, now they are gone: Suffolk concluded on the articles, The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter. I cannot blame them all: what is't to them? 'Tis thine they give away, and not their own. Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage And purchase friends and give to courtezans, Still revelling like lords till all be gone; While as the silly owner of the goods Weeps over them and wrings his hapless hands And shakes his head and trembling stands aloof, While all is shared and all is borne away, Ready to starve and dare not touch his own: So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue, While his own lands are bargain'd for and sold. Methinks the realms of England, France and Ireland Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood As did the fatal brand Althaea burn'd Unto the prince's heart of Calydon. Anjou and Maine both given unto the French! Cold news for me, for I had hope of France, Even as I have of fertile England's soil. A day will come when York shall claim his own; And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey, And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown, For that's the golden mark I seek to hit: Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right, Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist, Nor wear the diadem upon his head, Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown. Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve: Watch thou and wake when others be asleep, To pry into the secrets of the state; Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love, With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen, And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars: Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose, With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed; And in my standard bear the arms of York To grapple with the house of Lancaster; And, force perforce, I'll make him yield the crown, Whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair England down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn, Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load? Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows, As frowning at the favours of the world? Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth, Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight? What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem, Enchased with all the honours of the world? If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face, Until thy head be circled with the same. Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold. What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine: And, having both together heaved it up, We'll both together lift our heads to heaven, And never more abase our sight so low As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord, Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts. And may that thought, when I imagine ill Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry, Be my last breathing in this mortal world! My troublous dream this night doth make me sad.
What dream'd my lord? Tell me, and I'll requite itWith sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court, Was broke in twain; by whom I have forgot, But, as I think, it was by the cardinal; And on the pieces of the broken wand Were placed the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset, And William de la Pole, first duke of Suffolk. This was my dream: what it doth bode, God knows.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove Shall lose his head for his presumption. But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke: Methought I sat in seat of majesty In the cathedral church of Westminster, And in that chair where kings and queens are crown'd; Where Henry and dame Margaret kneel'd to me And on my head did set the diadem.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright: Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor, Art thou not second woman in the realm, And the protector's wife, beloved of him? Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command, Above the reach or compass of thy thought? And wilt thou still be hammering treachery, To tumble down thy husband and thyself From top of honour to disgrace's feet? Away from me, and let me hear no more!
What, what, my lord! Are you so choleric With Eleanor, for telling but her dream? Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself, And not be cheque'd.
Nay, be not angry; I am pleased again.
My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasureYou do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's,Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk.
I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently.
Follow I must; I cannot go before, While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind. Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood, I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks And smooth my way upon their headless necks; And, being a woman, I will not be slack To play my part in Fortune's pageant. Where are you there? Sir John! Nay, fear not, man, We are alone; here's none but thee and I.
Jesus preserve your royal majesty!
What say'st thou? Majesty! I am but grace.
But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice,Your grace's title shall be multiplied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say'st thou, man? Hast thou as yet conferr'd With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch, With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer? And will they undertake to do me good?
This they have promised, to show your highness A spirit raised from depth of under-ground, That shall make answer to such questions As by your grace shall be propounded him.
It is enough; I'll think upon the questions: When from St. Alban's we do make return, We'll see these things effected to the full. Here, Hume, take this reward; make merry, man, With thy confederates in this weighty cause.
Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold; Marry, and shall. But how now, Sir John Hume! Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum: The business asketh silent secrecy. Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch: Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil. Yet have I gold flies from another coast; I dare not say, from the rich cardinal And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk, Yet I do find it so; for to be plain, They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour, Have hired me to undermine the duchess And buz these conjurations in her brain. They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker;' Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker. Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near To call them both a pair of crafty knaves. Well, so it stands; and thus, I fear, at last Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck, And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall: Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
My masters, let's stand close: my lord protectorwill come this way by and by, and then we may deliverour supplications in the quill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good man!Jesu bless him!
Here a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him.I'll be the first, sure.
Come back, fool; this is the Duke of Suffolk, andnot my lord protector.
How now, fellow! Would'st anything with me?
I pray, my lord, pardon me; I took ye for my lordprotector.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reading] 'To my Lord Protector!' Are yoursupplications to his lordship? Let me see them:what is thine?
Mine is, an't please your grace, against JohnGoodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping myhouse, and lands, and wife and all, from me.
Thy wife, too! That's some wrong, indeed. What'syours? What's here!
[Reading] 'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing thecommons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!
Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Giving his petition] Against my master, ThomasHorner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightfulheir to the crown.
What sayst thou? Did the Duke of York say he wasrightful heir to the crown?
That my master was? No, forsooth: my master saidthat he was, and that the king was an usurper.
Who is there?
Take this fellow in, and send forhis master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hearmore of your matter before the King.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And as for you, that love to be protectedUnder the wings of our protector's grace,Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.
Away, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.
Come, let's be gone.
My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise, Is this the fashion in the court of England? Is this the government of Britain's isle, And this the royalty of Albion's king? What shall King Henry be a pupil still Under the surly Gloucester's governance? Am I a queen in title and in style, And must be made a subject to a duke? I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours Thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love And stolest away the ladies' hearts of France, I thought King Henry had resembled thee In courage, courtship and proportion: But all his mind is bent to holiness, To number Ave-Maries on his beads; His champions are the prophets and apostles, His weapons holy saws of sacred writ, His study is his tilt-yard, and his loves Are brazen images of canonized saints. I would the college of the cardinals Would choose him pope, and carry him to Rome, And set the triple crown upon his head: That were a state fit for his holiness.
Madam, be patient: as I was causeYour highness came to England, so will IIn England work your grace's full content.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beside the haughty protector, have we Beaufort, The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham, And grumbling York: and not the least of these But can do more in England than the king.
And he of these that can do most of allCannot do more in England than the Nevils:Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.
Not all these lords do vex me half so much As that proud dame, the lord protector's wife. She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies, More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife: Strangers in court do take her for the queen: She bears a duke's revenues on her back, And in her heart she scorns our poverty: Shall I not live to be avenged on her? Contemptuous base-born callet as she is, She vaunted 'mongst her minions t'other day, The very train of her worst wearing gown Was better worth than all my father's lands, Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her, And placed a quire of such enticing birds, That she will light to listen to the lays, And never mount to trouble you again. So, let her rest: and, madam, list to me; For I am bold to counsel you in this. Although we fancy not the cardinal, Yet must we join with him and with the lords, Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace. As for the Duke of York, this late complaint Will make but little for his benefit. So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last, And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.
For my part, noble lords, I care not which;Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If York have ill demean'd himself in France,Then let him be denay'd the regentship.
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,Let York be regent; I will yield to him.
Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no,Dispute not that: York is the worthier.
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.
The cardinal's not my better in the field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
Warwick may live to be the best of all.
Peace, son! And show some reason, Buckingham,Why Somerset should be preferred in this.
Because the king, forsooth, will have it so.
Madam, the king is old enough himselfTo give his censure: these are no women's matters.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he be old enough, what needs your graceTo be protector of his excellence?
Madam, I am protector of the realm;And, at his pleasure, will resign my place.
Resign it then and leave thine insolence.Since thou wert king—as who is king but thou?—The commonwealth hath daily run to wreck;The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas;And all the peers and nobles of the realmHave been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.
The commons hast thou rack'd; the clergy's bagsAre lank and lean with thy extortions.
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attireHave cost a mass of public treasury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy cruelty in executionUpon offenders, hath exceeded law,And left thee to the mercy of the law.
Thy sale of offices and towns in France,If they were known, as the suspect is great,Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
Give me my fan: what, minion! Can ye not?
I cry you mercy, madam; was it you?
Was't I! Yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman:Could I come near your beauty with my nails,I'd set my ten commandments in your face.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet aunt, be quiet; 'twas against her will.
Against her will! Good king, look to't in time; She'll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby: Though in this place most master wear no breeches, She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
Lord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor, And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds: She's tickled now; her fume needs no spurs, She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
Now, lords, my choler being over-blown With walking once about the quadrangle, I come to talk of commonwealth affairs. As for your spiteful false objections, Prove them, and I lie open to the law: But God in mercy so deal with my soul, As I in duty love my king and country! But, to the matter that we have in hand: I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man To be your regent in the realm of France.
Before we make election, give me leaveTo show some reason, of no little force,That York is most unmeet of any man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet: First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride; Next, if I be appointed for the place, My Lord of Somerset will keep me here, Without discharge, money, or furniture, Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands: Last time, I danced attendance on his will Till Paris was besieged, famish'd, and lost.
That can I witness; and a fouler factDid never traitor in the land commit.
Peace, headstrong Warwick!
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?
Because here is a man accused of treason:Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doth any one accuse York for a traitor?
What mean'st thou, Suffolk; tell me, what are these?
Please it your majesty, this is the man That doth accuse his master of high treason: His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York, Was rightful heir unto the English crown And that your majesty was a usurper.
Say, man, were these thy words?
An't shall please your majesty, I never said northought any such matter: God is my witness, I amfalsely accused by the villain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them tome in the garret one night, as we were scouring myLord of York's armour.
Base dunghill villain and mechanical, I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech. I do beseech your royal majesty, Let him have all the rigor of the law.
Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words. My accuser is my 'prentice; and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his knees he would be even with me: I have good witness of this: therefore I beseech your majesty, do not cast away an honest man for a villain's accusation.
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?
This doom, my lord, if I may judge: Let Somerset be regent over the French, Because in York this breeds suspicion: And let these have a day appointed them For single combat in convenient place, For he hath witness of his servant's malice: This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly thank your royal majesty.
And I accept the combat willingly.
Alas, my lord, I cannot fight; for God's sake, pity my case. The spite of man prevaileth against me. O Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to fight a blow. O Lord, my heart!
Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hang'd.
Away with them to prison; and the day of combatshall be the last of the next month. Come,Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, my masters; the duchess, I tell you, expectsperformance of your promises.
Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will herladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
Ay, what else? Fear you not her courage.
I have heard her reported to be a woman of an invincible spirit: but it shall be convenient, Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while we be busy below; and so, I pray you, go, in God's name, and leave u s.
Mother Jourdain, be youprostrate and grovel on the earth; John Southwell,read you; and let us to our work.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well said, my masters; and welcome all. To thisgear the sooner the better.
Patience, good lady; wizards know their times: Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night, The time of night when Troy was set on fire; The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl, And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves, That time best fits the work we have in hand. Madam, sit you and fear not: whom we raise, We will make fast within a hallow'd verge.
Adsum.
Asmath, By the eternal God, whose name and power Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask; For, till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads out of a paper] 'First of the king: what shall of him become?'
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose;But him outlive, and die a violent death.
'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?'
By water shall he die, and take his end.
'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him shun castles; Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains Than where castles mounted stand. Have done, for more I hardly can endure.
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!False fiend, avoid!
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash. Beldam, I think we watch'd you at an inch. What, madam, are you there? The king and commonweal Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains: My lord protector will, I doubt it not, See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.
Not half so bad as thine to England's king,Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.
True, madam, none at all: what call you this? Away with them! Let them be clapp'd up close. And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us. Stafford, take her to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.All, away!
Lord Buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well: A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon! Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ. What have we here?
[Reads] 'The duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose; But him outlive, and die a violent death.' Why, this is just 'Aio te, AEacida, Romanos vincere posse.' Well, to the rest: 'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk? By water shall he die, and take his end. What shall betide the Duke of Somerset? Let him shun castles; Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains Than where castles mounted stand.' Come, come, my lords; These oracles are hardly attain'd, And hardly understood. The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's, With him the husband of this lovely lady: Thither go these news, as fast as horse can carry them: A sorry breakfast for my lord protector.
Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,To be the post, in hope of his reward.
At your pleasure, my good lord. Who's withinthere, ho!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Invite my Lords of Salisbury and WarwickTo sup with me to-morrow night. Away!
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook, I saw not better sport these seven years' day: Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high; And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.
But what a point, my lord, your falcon made, And what a pitch she flew above the rest! To see how God in all his creatures works! Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.
No marvel, an it like your majesty, My lord protector's hawks do tower so well; They know their master loves to be aloft, And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.
My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mindThat mounts no higher than a bird can soar.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thought as much; he would be above the clouds.
Ay, my lord cardinal? How think you by that?Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven?
The treasury of everlasting joy.
Thy heaven is on earth; thine eyes and thoughts Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart; Pernicious protector, dangerous peer, That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal!
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory? Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? Churchmen so hot? Good uncle, hide such malice; With such holiness can you do it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No malice, sir; no more than well becomesSo good a quarrel and so bad a peer.
As who, my lord?
Why, as you, my lord,An't like your lordly lord-protectorship.
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.
And thy ambition, Gloucester.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee, peace, good queen,And whet not on these furious peers;For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make,Against this proud protector, with my sword!
[Aside to CARDINAL] Faith, holy uncle, would'twere come to that!
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] Marry, when thou darest.
[Aside to CARDINAL] Make up no factiousnumbers for the matter;In thine own person answer thy abuse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to GLOUCESTER] Ay, where thou darestnot peep: an if thou darest,This evening, on the east side of the grove.
How now, my lords!
Believe me, cousin Gloucester, Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly, We had had more sport. [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Come with thy two-hand sword.
True, uncle. [Aside to CARDINAL ] Are ye advised? The east side of the grove.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I am with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, uncle Gloucester!
Talking of hawking; nothing else, my lord.
[Aside to CARDINAL] Now, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave your crown for this,Or all my fence shall fail.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] Medice, teipsum—Protector, see to't well, protect yourself.
The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords. How irksome is this music to my heart! When such strings jar, what hope of harmony? I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What means this noise?Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?
A miracle! A miracle!
Come to the king and tell him what miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine,Within this half-hour, hath received his sight;A man that ne'er saw in his life before.
Now, God be praised, that to believing soulsGives light in darkness, comfort in despair!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the townsmen on procession,To present your highness with the man.
Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.
Stand by, my masters: bring him near the king;His highness' pleasure is to talk with him.
Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,That we for thee may glorify the Lord.What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?
Born blind, an't please your grace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, indeed, was he.
What woman is this?
His wife, an't like your worship.
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst havebetter told.
Where wert thou born?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At Berwick in the north, an't like your grace.
Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee:Let never day nor night unhallow'd pass,But still remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow, camest thou here by chance,Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?
God knows, of pure devotion; being call'd A hundred times and oftener, in my sleep, By good Saint Alban; who said, 'Simpcox, come, Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.'
Most true, forsooth; and many time and oftMyself have heard a voice to call him so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, art thou lame?
Ay, God Almighty help me!
How camest thou so?
A fall off of a tree.
A plum-tree, master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long hast thou been blind?
Born so, master.
What, and wouldst climb a tree?
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Too true; and bought his climbing very dear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldstventure so.
Alas, good master, my wife desired some damsons,And made me climb, with danger of my life.
A subtle knave! But yet it shall not serve.Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them:In my opinion yet thou seest not well.
Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God andSaint Alban.
Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Red, master; red as blood.
Why, that's well said. What colour is my gown of?
Black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.
Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of?
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, in all his life.
Tell me, sirrah, what's my name?
Alas, master, I know not.
What's his name?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not.
Nor his?
No, indeed, master.
What's thine own name?
Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou mightest as well have known all our names as thus to name the several colours we do wear. Sight may distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here hath done a miracle; and would ye not think his cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple to his legs again?
O master, that you could!
My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles inyour town, and things called whips?
Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.
Then send for one presently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap meover this stool and run away.
Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone:You go about to torture me in vain.
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrahbeadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah; off with yourdoublet quickly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?
It made me laugh to see the villain run.
Follow the knave; and take this drab away.
Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let them be whipped through every market-town, tillthey come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.
True; made the lame to leap and fly away.
But you have done more miracles than I;You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold. A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent, Under the countenance and confederacy Of Lady Eleanor, the protector's wife, The ringleader and head of all this rout, Have practised dangerously against your state, Dealing with witches and with conjurers: Whom we have apprehended in the fact; Raising up wicked spirits from under ground, Demanding of King Henry's life and death, And other of your highness' privy-council; As more at large your grace shall understand.
And so, my lord protector, by this means Your lady is forthcoming yet at London. This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge; 'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart: Sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers; And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to thee, Or to the meanest groom.
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest.And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal, How I have loved my king and commonweal: And, for my wife, I know not how it stands; Sorry I am to hear what I have heard: Noble she is, but if she have forgot Honour and virtue and conversed with such As, like to pitch, defile nobility, I banish her my bed and company And give her as a prey to law and shame, That hath dishonour'd Gloucester's honest name.
Well, for this night we will repose us here: To-morrow toward London back again, To look into this business thoroughly And call these foul offenders to their answers And poise the cause in justice' equal scales, Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick, Our simple supper ended, give me leave In this close walk to satisfy myself, In craving your opinion of my title, Which is infallible, to England's crown.
My lord, I long to hear it at full.
Sweet York, begin: and if thy claim be good,The Nevils are thy subjects to command.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then thus: Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons: The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales; The second, William of Hatfield, and the third, Lionel Duke of Clarence: next to whom Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster; The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York; The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester; William of Windsor was the seventh and last. Edward the Black Prince died before his father And left behind him Richard, his only son, Who after Edward the Third's death reign'd as king; Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt, Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth, Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king, Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came, And him to Pomfret; where, as all you know, Harmless Richard was murder'd traitorously.
Father, the duke hath told the truth:Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
Which now they hold by force and not by right;For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,The issue of the next son should have reign'd.
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line I claimed the crown, had issue, Philippe, a daughter, Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March: Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March; Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne and Eleanor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke, As I have read, laid claim unto the crown; And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king, Who kept him in captivity till he died. But to the rest.
His eldest sister, Anne, My mother, being heir unto the crown Married Richard Earl of Cambridge; who was son To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son. By her I claim the kingdom: she was heir To Roger Earl of March, who was the son Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe, Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence: So, if the issue of the elder son Succeed before the younger, I am king.
What plain proceeding is more plain than this? Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt, The fourth son; York claims it from the third. Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign: It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock. Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together; And in this private plot be we the first That shall salute our rightful sovereign With honour of his birthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!
We thank you, lords. But I am not your king Till I be crown'd and that my sword be stain'd With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster; And that's not suddenly to be perform'd, But with advice and silent secrecy. Do you as I do in these dangerous days: Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence, At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition, At Buckingham and all the crew of them, Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock, That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey: 'Tis that they seek, and they in seeking that Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.
My heart assures me that the Earl of WarwickShall one day make the Duke of York a king.
And, Nevil, this I do assure myself:Richard shall live to make the Earl of WarwickThe greatest man in England but the king.
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's wife: In sight of God and us, your guilt is great: Receive the sentence of the law for sins Such as by God's book are adjudged to death. You four, from hence to prison back again; From thence unto the place of execution: The witch in Smithfield shall be burn'd to ashes, And you three shall be strangled on the gallows. You, madam, for you are more nobly born, Despoiled of your honour in your life, Shall, after three days' open penance done, Live in your country here in banishment, With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment; welcome were my death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee:I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief. Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground! I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go; Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester: ere thou go, Give up thy staff: Henry will to himself Protector be; and God shall be my hope, My stay, my guide and lantern to my feet: And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved Than when thou wert protector to thy King.
I see no reason why a king of years Should be to be protected like a child. God and King Henry govern England's realm. Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm.
My staff? Here, noble Henry, is my staff: As willingly do I the same resign As e'er thy father Henry made it mine; And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it As others would ambitiously receive it. Farewell, good king: when I am dead and gone, May honourable peace attend thy throne!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, now is Henry king, and Margaret queen; And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself, That bears so shrewd a maim; two pulls at once; His lady banish'd, and a limb lopp'd off. This staff of honour raught, there let it stand Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays;Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Please it your majesty, This is the day appointed for the combat; And ready are the appellant and defendant, The armourer and his man, to enter the lists, So please your highness to behold the fight.
Ay, good my lord; for purposely thereforeLeft I the court, to see this quarrel tried.
O God's name, see the lists and all things fit:Here let them end it; and God defend the right!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never saw a fellow worse bested,Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,The servant of this armourer, my lords.
Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup ofsack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.
And here, neighbour, here's a cup of charneco.
And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour:drink, and fear not your man.
Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all; anda fig for Peter!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.
Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fightfor credit of the 'prentices.
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray you; for I think I have taken my last draught in this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee my apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer: and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O Lord bless me! I pray God! For I am never able to deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.Sirrah, what's thy name?
Peter, forsooth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peter! What more?
Thump.
Thump! Then see thou thump thy master well.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the king, nor the queen: and therefore, Peter, have at thee with a downright blow!
Dispatch: this knave's tongue begins to double.Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.
Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and thegood wine in thy master's way.
O God, have I overcome mine enemy in this presence?O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right!
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight; For his death we do perceive his guilt: And God in justice hath revealed to us The truth and innocence of this poor fellow, Which he had thought to have murder'd wrongfully. Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud; And after summer evermore succeeds Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold: So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet. Sirs, what's o'clock?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ten, my lord.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess: Uneath may she endure the flinty streets, To tread them with her tender-feeling feet. Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook The abject people gazing on thy face, With envious looks, laughing at thy shame, That erst did follow thy proud chariot-wheels When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets. But, soft! I think she comes; and I'll prepare My tear-stain'd eyes to see her miseries.
So please your grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.
No, stir not, for your lives; let her pass by.
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame? Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze! See how the giddy multitude do point, And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee! Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks, And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame, And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be patient, gentle Nell; forget this grief.
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself! For whilst I think I am thy married wife And thou a prince, protector of this land, Methinks I should not thus be led along, Mail'd up in shame, with papers on my back, And followed with a rabble that rejoice To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans. The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet, And when I start, the envious people laugh And bid me be advised how I tread. Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke? Trow'st thou that e'er I'll look upon the world, Or count them happy that enjoy the sun? No; dark shall be my light and night my day; To think upon my pomp shall be my hell. Sometime I'll say, I am Duke Humphrey's wife, And he a prince and ruler of the land: Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess, Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock To every idle rascal follower. But be thou mild and blush not at my shame, Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will; For Suffolk, he that can do all in all With her that hateth thee and hates us all, And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,And, fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee:But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear! Thou aimest all awry; I must offend before I be attainted; And had I twenty times so many foes, And each of them had twenty times their power, All these could not procure me any scathe, So long as I am loyal, true and crimeless. Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach? Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away But I in danger for the breach of law. Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell: I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience; These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.
I summon your grace to his majesty's parliament,Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before!This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff,Let not her penance exceed the king's commission.
An't please your grace, here my commission stays,And Sir John Stanley is appointed nowTo take her with him to the Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge, may't please your grace.
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray You use her well: the world may laugh again; And I may live to do you kindness if You do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.
Art thou gone too? All comfort go with thee! For none abides with me: my joy is death; Death, at whose name I oft have been afear'd, Because I wish'd this world's eternity. Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence; I care not whither, for I beg no favour, Only convey me where thou art commanded.
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man;There to be used according to your state.
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach:And shall I then be used reproachfully?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady;According to that state you shall be used.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.
It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.
Ay, ay, farewell; thy office is discharged.Come, Stanley, shall we go?
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,And go we to attire you for our journey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My shame will not be shifted with my sheet: No, it will hang upon my richest robes And show itself, attire me how I can. Go, lead the way; I long to see my prison.
I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.
Can you not see? Or will ye not observe The strangeness of his alter'd countenance? With what a majesty he bears himself, How insolent of late he is become, How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself? We know the time since he was mild and affable, And if we did but glance a far-off look, Immediately he was upon his knee, That all the court admired him for submission: But meet him now, and, be it in the morn, When every one will give the time of day, He knits his brow and shows an angry eye, And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee, Disdaining duty that to us belongs. Small curs are not regarded when they grin; But great men tremble when the lion roars; And Humphrey is no little man in England. First note that he is near you in descent, And should you fall, he as the next will mount. Me seemeth then it is no policy, Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears And his advantage following your decease, That he should come about your royal person Or be admitted to your highness' council. By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts, And when he please to make commotion, 'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him. Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted; Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden And choke the herbs for want of husbandry. The reverent care I bear unto my lord Made me collect these dangers in the duke. If it be fond, call it a woman's fear; Which fear if better reasons can supplant, I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke. My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York, Reprove my allegation, if you can; Or else conclude my words effectual.
Well hath your highness seen into this duke; And, had I first been put to speak my mind, I think I should have told your grace's tale. The duchess, by his subornation, Upon my life, began her devilish practises: Or, if he were not privy to those faults, Yet, by reputing of his high descent, As next the king he was successive heir, And such high vaunts of his nobility, Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchess By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall. Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep; And in his simple show he harbours treason. The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb. No, no, my sovereign; Gloucester is a man Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.
Did he not, contrary to form of law,Devise strange deaths for small offences done?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And did he not, in his protectorship, Levy great sums of money through the realm For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it? By means whereof the towns each day revolted.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.Which time will bring to light in smoothDuke Humphrey.
My lords, at once: the care you have of us, To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot, Is worthy praise: but, shall I speak my conscience, Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent From meaning treason to our royal person As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove: The duke is virtuous, mild and too well given To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance! Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrowed, For he's disposed as the hateful raven: Is he a lamb? His skin is surely lent him, For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolf. Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit? Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
All health unto my gracious sovereign!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?
That all your interest in those territoriesIs utterly bereft you; all is lost.
Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done!
[Aside] Cold news for me; for I had hope of France As firmly as I hope for fertile England. Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud And caterpillars eat my leaves away; But I will remedy this gear ere long, Or sell my title for a glorious grave.
All happiness unto my lord the king!Pardon, my liege, that I have stay'd so long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art:I do arrest thee of high treason here.
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush Nor change my countenance for this arrest: A heart unspotted is not easily daunted. The purest spring is not so free from mud As I am clear from treason to my sovereign: Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?
'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay;By means whereof his highness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so? What are they that think it? I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay, Nor ever had one penny bribe from France. So help me God, as I have watch'd the night, Ay, night by night, in studying good for England, That doit that e'er I wrested from the king, Or any groat I hoarded to my use, Be brought against me at my trial-day! No; many a pound of mine own proper store, Because I would not tax the needy commons, Have I disbursed to the garrisons, And never ask'd for restitution.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I say no more than truth, so help me God!
In your protectorship you did deviseStrange tortures for offenders never heard of,That England was defamed by tyranny.
Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was protector, Pity was all the fault that was in me; For I should melt at an offender's tears, And lowly words were ransom for their fault. Unless it were a bloody murderer, Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers, I never gave them condign punishment: Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured Above the felon or what trespass else.
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered: But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge, Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself. I do arrest you in his highness' name; And here commit you to my lord cardinal To keep, until your further time of trial.
My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hopeThat you will clear yourself from all suspect:My conscience tells me you are innocent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous: Virtue is choked with foul ambition And charity chased hence by rancour's hand; Foul subornation is predominant And equity exiled your highness' land. I know their complot is to have my life, And if my death might make this island happy, And prove the period of their tyranny, I would expend it with all willingness: But mine is made the prologue to their play; For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril, Will not conclude their plotted tragedy. Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice, And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate; Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue The envious load that lies upon his heart; And dogged York, that reaches at the moon, Whose overweening arm I have pluck'd back, By false accuse doth level at my life: And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest, Causeless have laid disgraces on my head, And with your best endeavour have stirr'd up My liefest liege to be mine enemy: Ay, all you have laid your heads together— Myself had notice of your conventicles— And all to make away my guiltless life. I shall not want false witness to condemn me, Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt; The ancient proverb will be well effected: 'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.'
My liege, his railing is intolerable: If those that care to keep your royal person From treason's secret knife and traitors' rage Be thus upbraided, chid and rated at, And the offender granted scope of speech, 'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here With ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd, As if she had suborned some to swear False allegations to o'erthrow his state?
But I can give the loser leave to chide.
Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed;Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!And well such losers may have leave to speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day:Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.
Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure.
Ah! Thus King Henry throws away his crutch Before his legs be firm to bear his body. Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side, And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first. Ah, that my fear were false! Ah, that it were! For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,Do or undo, as if ourself were here.
What, will your highness leave the parliament?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]
Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams. Henry my lord is cold in great affairs, Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucester's show Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile With sorrow snares relenting passengers, Or as the snake roll'd in a flowering bank, With shining chequer'd slough, doth sting a child That for the beauty thinks it excellent. Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I— And yet herein I judge mine own wit good— This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world, To rid us of the fear we have of him.
That he should die is worthy policy;But yet we want a colour for his death:'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.
But, in my mind, that were no policy: The king will labour still to save his life, The commons haply rise, to save his life; And yet we have but trivial argument, More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.
So that, by this, you would not have him die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!
'Tis York that hath more reason for his death. But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk, Say as you think, and speak it from your souls, Were't not all one, an empty eagle were set To guard the chicken from a hungry kite, As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector?
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Madam, 'tis true; and were't not madness, then, To make the fox surveyor of the fold? Who being accused a crafty murderer, His guilt should be but idly posted over, Because his purpose is not executed. No; let him die, in that he is a fox, By nature proved an enemy to the flock, Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood, As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege. And do not stand on quillets how to slay him: Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety, Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how, So he be dead; for that is good deceit Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not resolute, except so much were done; For things are often spoke and seldom meant: But that my heart accordeth with my tongue, Seeing the deed is meritorious, And to preserve my sovereign from his foe, Say but the word, and I will be his priest.
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk, Ere you can take due orders for a priest: Say you consent and censure well the deed, And I'll provide his executioner, I tender so the safety of my liege.
Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.
And so say I.
And I and now we three have spoke it,It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain, To signify that rebels there are up And put the Englishmen unto the sword: Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime, Before the wound do grow uncurable; For, being green, there is great hope of help.
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent as regent thither:'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd;Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,Had been the regent there instead of me,He never would have stay'd in France so long.
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done: I rather would have lost my life betimes Than bring a burthen of dishonour home By staying there so long till all were lost. Show me one scar character'd on thy skin: Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire, If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with: No more, good York; sweet Somerset, be still: Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,Might happily have proved far worse than his.
What, worse than nought? Nay, then, a shame take all!
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is. The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms And temper clay with blood of Englishmen: To Ireland will you lead a band of men, Collected choicely, from each county some, And try your hap against the Irishmen?
I will, my lord, so please his majesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, our authority is his consent,And what we do establish he confirms:Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.
I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
A charge, Lord York, that I will see perform'd.But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
No more of him; for I will deal with him That henceforth he shall trouble us no more. And so break off; the day is almost spent: Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen daysAt Bristol I expect my soldiers;For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll see it truly done, my Lord of York.
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts, And change misdoubt to resolution: Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art Resign to death; it is not worth the enjoying: Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man, And find no harbour in a royal heart. Faster than spring-time showers comes thought on thought, And not a thought but thinks on dignity. My brain more busy than the labouring spider Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies. Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done, To send me packing with an host of men: I fear me you but warm the starved snake, Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting your hearts. 'Twas men I lack'd and you will give them me: I take it kindly; and yet be well assured You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands. Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band, I will stir up in England some black storm Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell; And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage Until the golden circuit on my head, Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams, Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw. And, for a minister of my intent, I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman, John Cade of Ashford, To make commotion, as full well he can, Under the title of John Mortimer. In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade Oppose himself against a troop of kerns, And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts Were almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine; And, in the end being rescued, I have seen Him caper upright like a wild Morisco, Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells. Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern, Hath he conversed with the enemy, And undiscover'd come to me again And given me notice of their villanies. This devil here shall be my substitute; For that John Mortimer, which now is dead, In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble: By this I shall perceive the commons' mind, How they affect the house and claim of York. Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured, I know no pain they can inflict upon him Will make him say I moved him to those arms. Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will, Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength And reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd; For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be, And Henry put apart, the next for me.
Run to my Lord of Suffolk; let him knowWe have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.
O that it were to do! What have we done?Didst ever hear a man so penitent?
Here comes my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?
Ay, my good lord, he's dead.
Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house; I will reward you for this venturous deed. The king and all the peers are here at hand. Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well, According as I gave directions?
'Tis, my good lord.
Away! Be gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, call our uncle to our presence straight;Say we intend to try his grace to-day.If he be guilty, as 'tis published.
I'll call him presently, my noble lord.
Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all, Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester Than from true evidence of good esteem He be approved in practise culpable.
God forbid any malice should prevail,That faultless may condemn a nobleman!Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!
I thank thee, Meg; these words content me much.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! Why look'st thou pale? Why tremblest thou?Where is our uncle? What's the matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his bed, my lord; Gloucester is dead.
Marry, God forfend!
God's secret judgment: I did dream to-nightThe duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
How fares my lord? Help, lords! The king is dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
He doth revive again: madam, be patient.
O heavenly God!
How fares my gracious lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Comfort, my sovereign! Gracious Henry, comfort!
What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me? Came he right now to sing a raven's note, Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers; And thinks he that the chirping of a wren, By crying comfort from a hollow breast, Can chase away the first-conceived sound? Hide not thy poison with such sugar'd words; Lay not thy hands on me; forbear, I say; Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting. Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight! Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world. Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding: Yet do not go away: come, basilisk, And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight; For in the shade of death I shall find joy; In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus? Although the duke was enemy to him, Yet he most Christian-like laments his death: And for myself, foe as he was to me, Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life, I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans, Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs, And all to have the noble duke alive. What know I how the world may deem of me? For it is known we were but hollow friends: It may be judged I made the duke away; So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded, And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach. This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy! To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is. What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face? I am no loathsome leper; look on me. What! Art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf? Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen. Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb? Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy. Erect his statue and worship it, And make my image but an alehouse sign. Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea And twice by awkward wind from England's bank Drove back again unto my native clime? What boded this, but well forewarning wind Did seem to say 'Seek not a scorpion's nest, Nor set no footing on this unkind shore'? What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves: And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore, Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock Yet AEolus would not be a murderer, But left that hateful office unto thee: The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me, Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore, With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness: The splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sands And would not dash me with their ragged sides, Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they, Might in thy palace perish Margaret. As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs, When from thy shore the tempest beat us back, I stood upon the hatches in the storm, And when the dusky sky began to rob My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view, I took a costly jewel from my neck, A heart it was, bound in with diamonds, And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it, And so I wish'd thy body might my heart: And even with this I lost fair England's view And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart And call'd them blind and dusky spectacles, For losing ken of Albion's wished coast. How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue, The agent of thy foul inconstancy, To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did When he to madding Dido would unfold His father's acts commenced in burning Troy! Am I not witch'd like her? Or thou not false like him? Ay me, I can no more! Die, Margaret! For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is reported, mighty sovereign, That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'd By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means. The commons, like an angry hive of bees That want their leader, scatter up and down And care not who they sting in his revenge. Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny, Until they hear the order of his death.
That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true; But how he died God knows, not Henry: Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse, And comment then upon his sudden death.
That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,With the rude multitude till I return.
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts, My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life! If my suspect be false, forgive me, God, For judgment only doth belong to thee. Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain Upon his face an ocean of salt tears, To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk, And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling: But all in vain are these mean obsequies; And to survey his dead and earthly image, What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That is to see how deep my grave is made;For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,For seeing him I see my life in death.
As surely as my soul intends to live With that dread King that took our state upon him To free us from his father's wrathful curse, I do believe that violent hands were laid Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?
See how the blood is settled in his face. Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost, Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless, Being all descended to the labouring heart; Who, in the conflict that it holds with death, Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy; Which with the heart there cools and ne'er returneth To blush and beautify the cheek again. But see, his face is black and full of blood, His eye-balls further out than when he lived, Staring full ghastly like a strangled man; His hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretched with struggling; His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd And tugg'd for life and was by strength subdued: Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking; His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged, Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged. It cannot be but he was murder'd here; The least of all these signs were probable.
Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?Myself and Beaufort had him in protection;And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But both of you were vow'd Duke Humphrey's foes, And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep: 'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend; And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemenAs guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh And sees fast by a butcher with an axe, But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter? Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest, But may imagine how the bird was dead, Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak? Even so suspicious is this tragedy.
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men; But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease, That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart That slanders me with murder's crimson badge. Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwickshire, That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious spiritNor cease to be an arrogant controller,Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
Madam, be still; with reverence may I say;For every word you speak in his behalfIs slander to your royal dignity.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor! If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much, Thy mother took into her blameful bed Some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock Was graft with crab-tree slip; whose fruit thou art, And never of the Nevils' noble race.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee And I should rob the deathsman of his fee, Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames, And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild, I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech, And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st That thou thyself was born in bastardy; And after all this fearful homage done, Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell, Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,If from this presence thou darest go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with theeAnd do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted! Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just, And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
What noise is this?
Why, how now, lords! Your wrathful weapons drawnHere in our presence! Dare you be so bold?Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The traitorous Warwick with the men of BurySet all upon me, mighty sovereign.
[To the Commons, entering] Sirs, stand apart; the king shall know your mind. Dread lord, the commons send you word by me, Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death, Or banished fair England's territories, They will by violence tear him from your palace And torture him with grievous lingering death. They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died; They say, in him they fear your highness' death; And mere instinct of love and loyalty, Free from a stubborn opposite intent, As being thought to contradict your liking, Makes them thus forward in his banishment. They say, in care of your most royal person, That if your highness should intend to sleep And charge that no man should disturb your rest In pain of your dislike or pain of death, Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict, Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue, That slily glided towards your majesty, It were but necessary you were waked, Lest, being suffer'd in that harmful slumber, The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal; And therefore do they cry, though you forbid, That they will guard you, whether you will or no, From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is, With whose envenomed and fatal sting, Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth, They say, is shamefully bereft of life.
[Within] An answer from the king, myLord of Salisbury!
'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds, Could send such message to their sovereign: But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd, To show how quaint an orator you are: But all the honour Salisbury hath won Is, that he was the lord ambassador Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king.
[Within] An answer from the king, or we will all breakin!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me. I thank them for their tender loving care; And had I not been cited so by them, Yet did I purpose as they do entreat; For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means: And therefore, by His majesty I swear, Whose far unworthy deputy I am, He shall not breathe infection in this air But three days longer, on the pain of death.
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!
Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk! No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him, Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath. Had I but said, I would have kept my word, But when I swear, it is irrevocable. If, after three days' space, thou here be'st found On any ground that I am ruler of, The world shall not be ransom for thy life. Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me; I have great matters to impart to thee.
Mischance and sorrow go along with you! Heart's discontent and sour affliction Be playfellows to keep you company! There's two of you; the devil make a third! And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
A plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse them? Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan, I would invent as bitter-searching terms, As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear, Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth, With full as many signs of deadly hate, As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave: My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words; Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint; Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract; Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban: And even now my burthen'd heart would break, Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink! Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste! Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees! Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks! Their softest touch as smart as lizards' sting! Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss, And boding screech-owls make the concert full! All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell—
Enough, sweet Suffolk; thou torment'st thyself; And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass, Or like an overcharged gun, recoil, And turn the force of them upon thyself.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave? Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from, Well could I curse away a winter's night, Though standing naked on a mountain top, Where biting cold would never let grass grow, And think it but a minute spent in sport.
O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand, That I may dew it with my mournful tears; Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place, To wash away my woful monuments. O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand, That thou mightst think upon these by the seal, Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee! So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief; 'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by, As one that surfeits thinking on a want. I will repeal thee, or, be well assured, Adventure to be banished myself: And banished I am, if but from thee. Go; speak not to me; even now be gone. O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves, Loather a hundred times to part than die. Yet now farewell; and farewell life with thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished; Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee. 'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence; A wilderness is populous enough, So Suffolk had thy heavenly company: For where thou art, there is the world itself, With every several pleasure in the world, And where thou art not, desolation. I can no more: live thou to joy thy life; Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest.
Wither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?
To signify unto his majesty That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death; For suddenly a grievous sickness took him, That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air, Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth. Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost Were by his side; sometime he calls the king, And whispers to his pillow, as to him, The secrets of his overcharged soul; And I am sent to tell his majesty That even now he cries aloud for him.
Go tell this heavy message to the king.
Ay me! What is this world! What news are these! But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss, Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure? Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee, And with the southern clouds contend in tears, Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows? Now get thee hence: the king, thou know'st, is coming; If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I depart from thee, I cannot live; And in thy sight to die, what were it else But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap? Here could I breathe my soul into the air, As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe Dying with mother's dug between its lips: Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad, And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes, To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth; So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul, Or I should breathe it so into thy body, And then it lived in sweet Elysium. To die by thee were but to die in jest; From thee to die were torture more than death: O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
Away! Though parting be a fretful corrosive, It is applied to a deathful wound. To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee; For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe, I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st cask That ever did contain a thing of worth. Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we This way fall I to death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This way for me.
How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, tothy sovereign.
If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure,Enough to purchase such another island,So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,Where death's approach is seen so terrible!
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bring me unto my trial when you will. Died he not in his bed? Where should he die? Can I make men live, whether they will or no? O, torture me no more! I will confess. Alive again? Then show me where he is: I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him. He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them. Comb down his hair; look, look! It stands upright, Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul. Give me some drink; and bid the apothecary Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
O thou eternal Mover of the heavens. Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch! O, beat away the busy meddling fiend That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul. And from his bosom purge this black despair!
See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!
Disturb him not; let him pass peaceably.
Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be! Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss, Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope. He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close;And let us all to meditation.
The gaudy, blabbing and remorseful day Is crept into the bosom of the sea; And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades That drag the tragic melancholy night; Who, with their drowsy, slow and flagging wings, Clip dead men's graves and from their misty jaws Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air. Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize; For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs, Here shall they make their ransom on the sand, Or with their blood stain this discolour'd shore. Master, this prisoner freely give I thee; And thou that art his mate, make boot of this; The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master? Let me know.
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns, And bear the name and port of gentlemen? Cut both the villains' throats; for die you shall: The lives of those which we have lost in fight Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!
I'll give it, sir; and therefore spare my life.
And so will I and write home for it straight.
[To SUFFOLK] I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die;And so should these, if I might have my will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be not so rash; take ransom, let him live.
Look on my George; I am a gentleman:Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
And so am I; my name is Walter Whitmore.How now! Why start'st thou? What, dothdeath affright?
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death. A cunning man did calculate my birth And told me that by water I should die: Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded; Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.
Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not: Never yet did base dishonour blur our name, But with our sword we wiped away the blot; Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge, Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced, And I proclaim'd a coward through the world!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, Whitmore; for thy prisoner is a prince,The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags!
Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke:Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood, The honourable blood of Lancaster, Must not be shed by such a jaded groom. Hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup? Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth mule And thought thee happy when I shook my head? How often hast thou waited at my cup, Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board, When I have feasted with Queen Margaret? Remember it and let it make thee crest-fall'n, Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride; How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood And duly waited for my coming forth? This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf, And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words are blunt and so art thou.
Convey him hence and on our longboat's sideStrike off his head.
Thou darest not, for thy own.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, Pole.
Pole?
Pool! Sir Pool! Lord! Ay, kennel, puddle, sink; whose filth and dirt Troubles the silver spring where England drinks. Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth For swallowing the treasure of the realm: Thy lips that kiss'd the queen shall sweep the ground; And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's death, Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain, Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again: And wedded be thou to the hags of hell, For daring to affy a mighty lord Unto the daughter of a worthless king, Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem. By devilish policy art thou grown great, And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart. By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France, The false revolting Normans thorough thee Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts, And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home. The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all, Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain, As hating thee, are rising up in arms: And now the house of York, thrust from the crown By shameful murder of a guiltless king And lofty proud encroaching tyranny, Burns with revenging fire ; whose hopeful colours Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine, Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.' The commons here in Kent are up in arms: And, to conclude, reproach and beggary Is crept into the palace of our king. And all by thee. Away! Convey him hence.
O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges! Small things make base men proud: this villain here,Being captain of a pinnace, threatens moreThan Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate. Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives: It is impossible that I should die By such a lowly vassal as thyself. Thy words move rage and not remorse in me: I go of message from the queen to France; I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
Walter,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Gelidus timor occupat artus it is thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.What, are ye daunted now? Now will ye stoop?
My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.
Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough, Used to command, untaught to plead for favour. Far be it we should honour such as these With humble suit: no, rather let my head Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any Save to the God of heaven and to my king; And sooner dance upon a bloody pole Than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom. True nobility is exempt from fear: More can I bear than you dare execute.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can, That this my death may never be forgot! Great men oft die by vile bezonians: A Roman sworder and banditto slave Murder'd sweet Tully; Brutus' bastard hand Stabb'd Julius Caesar; savage islanders Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.
And as for these whose ransom we have set,It is our pleasure one of them depart;Therefore come you with us and let him go.
There let his head and lifeless body lie,Until the queen his mistress bury it.
O barbarous and bloody spectacle! His body will I bear unto the king: If he revenge it not, yet will his friends; So will the queen, that living held him dear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath;they have been up these two days.
They have the more need to sleep now, then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dressthe commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say itwas never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
O miserable age! Virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
Nay, more, the king's council are no good workmen.
True; and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation; which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be labouring men; and therefore should we be magistrates.
Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of abrave mind than a hard hand.
I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, thetanner of Wingham,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He shall have the skin of our enemies, to makedog's-leather of.
And Dick the Butcher,—
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity'sthroat cut like a calf.
And Smith the weaver,—
Argo, their thread of life is spun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come, let's fall in with them.
We John Cade, so termed of our supposed father,—
[Aside] Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired withthe spirit of putting down kings and princes,—Command silence.
Silence!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My father was a Mortimer,—
[Aside] He was an honest man, and a goodbricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet,—
[Aside] I knew her well; she was a midwife.
My wife descended of the Lacies,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] She was, indeed, a pedler's daughter, andsold many laces.
[Aside] But now of late, not able to travel with herfurred pack, she washes bucks here at home.
Therefore am I of an honourable house.
[Aside] Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable;and there was he borne, under a hedge, for hisfather had never a house but the cage.
Valiant I am.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] A' must needs; for beggary is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
[Aside] No question of that; for I have seen himwhipped three market-days together.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
[Aside] He need not fear the sword; for his coat is ofproof.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] But methinks he should stand in fear offire, being burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep.
Be brave, then; for your captain is brave, and vows reformation. There shall be in England seven halfpenny loaves sold for a penny: the three-hooped pot; shall have ten hoops and I will make it felony to drink small beer: all the realm shall be in common; and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass: and when I am king, as king I will be,—
God save your majesty!
I thank you, good people: there shall be no money; all shall eat and drink on my score; and I will apparel them all in one livery, that they may agree like brothers and worship me their lord.
The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment? That parchment, being scribbled o'er, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings: but I say, 'tis the bee's wax; for I did but seal once to a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How now! Who's there?
The clerk of Chartham: he can write and read andcast accompt.
O monstrous!
We took him setting of boys' copies.
Here's a villain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Has a book in his pocket with red letters in't.
Nay, then, he is a conjurer.
Nay, he can make obligations, and write court-hand.
I am sorry for't: the man is a proper man, of minehonour; unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee: what is thy name?
Emmanuel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They use to write it on the top of letters: 'twillgo hard with you.
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? Orhast thou a mark to thyself, like an honestplain-dealing man?
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought upthat I can write my name.
He hath confessed: away with him! He's a villainand a traitor.
Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen andink-horn about his neck.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where's our general?
Here I am, thou particular fellow.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and hisbrother are hard by, with the king's forces.
Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. Heshall be encountered with a man as good as himself:he is but a knight, is a'?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Now have at him!
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent, Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down; Home to your cottages, forsake this groom: The king is merciful, if you revolt.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,If you go forward; therefore yield, or die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not:It is to you, good people, that I speak,Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign;For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
Villain, thy father was a plasterer;And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
And what of that?
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir.
By her he had two children at one birth.
That's false.
Ay, there's the question; but I say, 'tis true: The elder of them, being put to nurse, Was by a beggar-woman stolen away; And, ignorant of his birth and parentage, Became a bricklayer when he came to age: His son am I; deny it, if you can.
Nay, 'tis too true; therefore he shall be king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, andthe bricks are alive at this day to testify it;therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this base drudge's words,That speaks he knows not what?
Ay, marry, will we; therefore get ye gone.
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
[Aside] He lies, for I invented it myself. Go to, sirrah, tell the king from me, that, for his father's sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content he shall reign; but I'll be protector over him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Say's head forselling the dukedom of Maine.
And good reason; for thereby is England mained, and fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch: and more than that, he can speak French; and therefore he is a traitor.
O gross and miserable ignorance!
Nay, answer, if you can: the Frenchmen are our enemies; go to, then, I ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good counsellor, or no?
No, no; and therefore we'll have his head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,Assail them with the army of the king.
Herald, away; and throughout every town Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade; That those which fly before the battle ends May, even in their wives' and children's sight, Be hang'd up for example at their doors: And you that be the king's friends, follow me.
And you that love the commons, follow me. Now show yourselves men; 'tis for liberty. We will not leave one lord, one gentleman: Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon; For they are thrifty honest men, and such As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.
They are all in order and march toward us.
But then are we in order when we are mostout of order. Come, march forward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
Here, sir.
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behavedst thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter-house: therefore thus will I reward thee, the Lent shall be as long again as it is; and thou shalt have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking one.
I desire no more.
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. Thismonument of the victory will I bear;
[SEQ_SPLITTER]and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse' heelstill I do come to London, where we will have themayor's sword borne before us.
If we mean to thrive and do good, break open thegaols and let out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's marchtowards London.
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind, And makes it fearful and degenerate; Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep. But who can cease to weep and look on this? Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast: But where's the body that I should embrace?
What answer makes your grace to the rebels'supplication?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll send some holy bishop to entreat; For God forbid so many simple souls Should perish by the sword! And I myself, Rather than bloody war shall cut them short, Will parley with Jack Cade their general: But stay, I'll read it over once again.
Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me, And could it not enforce them to relent, That were unworthy to behold the same?
Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his.
How now, madam! Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death? I fear me, love, if that I had been dead, Thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
How now! What news? Why comest thou in such haste?
The rebels are in Southwark; fly, my lord! Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer, Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house, And calls your grace usurper openly And vows to crown himself in Westminster. His army is a ragged multitude Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless: Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death Hath given them heart and courage to proceed: All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen, They call false caterpillars, and intend their death.
O graceless men! They know not what they do.
My gracious lord, return to Killingworth,Until a power be raised to put them down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!
Lord Say, the traitors hate thee;Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
So might your grace's person be in danger.The sight of me is odious in their eyes;And therefore in this city will I stayAnd live alone as secret as I may.
Jack Cade hath gotten London bridge: The citizens fly and forsake their houses: The rascal people, thirsting after prey, Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear To spoil the city and your royal court.
Then linger not, my lord, away, take horse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, Margaret; God, our hope, will succor us.
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord: trust not the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,And therefore am I bold and resolute.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! Is Jack Cade slain?
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have won the bridge, killing all those that withstand them: the lord mayor craves aid of your honour from the Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command; But I am troubled here with them myself; The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower. But get you to Smithfield, and gather head, And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe; Fight for your king, your country and your lives; And so, farewell, for I must hence again.
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of our reign . And now henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls me other than Lord Mortimer.
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Knock him down there.
If this fellow be wise, he'll never call ye JackCade more: I think he hath a very fair warning.
My lord, there's an army gathered together inSmithfield.
Come, then, let's go fight with them; but first, goand set London bridge on fire; and, if you can, burndown the Tower too. Come, let's away.
So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy;others to the Inns of Court; down with them all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have a suit unto your lordship.
Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
[Aside] Mass, 'twill be sore law, then; for he wasthrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not wholeyet.
[Aside] Nay, John, it will be stinking law for hisbreath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burnall the records of the realm: my mouth shall bethe parliament of England.
[Aside] Then we are like to have biting statutes,unless his teeth be pulled out.
And henceforward all things shall be in common.
My lord, a prize, a prize! Here's the Lord Say, which sold the towns in France ; he that made us pay one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the pound, the last subsidy.
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah, thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! Now art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction regal. What canst thou answer to my majesty for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no other books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to be used, and, contrary to the king, his crown and dignity, thou hast built a paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed justices of peace, to call poor men before them about matters they were not able to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in prison ; and because they could not read, thou hast hanged them; when, indeed, only for that cause they have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What of that?
Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear acloak, when honester men than thou go in their hoseand doublets.
And work in their shirt too; as myself, for example,that am a butcher.
You men of Kent,—
What say you of Kent?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing but this; 'tis 'bona terra, mala gens.'
Away with him, away with him! He speaks Latin.
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will. Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ, Is term'd the civil'st place of this isle: Sweet is the country, because full of riches; The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy; Which makes me hope you are not void of pity. I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy, Yet, to recover them, would lose my life. Justice with favour have I always done; Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never. When have I aught exacted at your hands, But to maintain the king, the realm and you? Large gifts have I bestow'd on learned clerks, Because my book preferr'd me to the king, And seeing ignorance is the curse of God, Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven, Unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits, You cannot but forbear to murder me: This tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings For your behoof,—
Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?
Great men have reaching hands: oft have I struckThose that I never saw and struck them dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O monstrous coward! What, to come behind folks?
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
Give him a box o' the ear and that will make 'em red again.
Long sitting to determine poor men's causesHath made me full of sickness and diseases.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle, then, and the help of hatchet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why dost thou quiver, man?
The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, I'll be evenwith you: I'll see if his head will stand steadieron a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead him.
Tell me wherein have I offended most? Have I affected wealth or honour? Speak. Are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold? Is my apparel sumptuous to behold? Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death? These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding, This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts. O, let me live!
[Aside] I feel remorse in myself with his words; but I'll bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for pleading so well for his life. [Aloud.] Away with him! He has a familiar under his tongue; he speaks not o' God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike off his head presently; and then break into his son-in-law's house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall be done.
Ah, countrymen! If when you make your prayers,God should be so obdurate as yourselves,How would it fare with your departed souls?And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Away with him! And do as I command ye.
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they have it: men shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take upcommodities upon our bills?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, presently.
O, brave!
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they loved well when they were alive. Now part them again, lest they consult about the giving up of some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night: for with these borne before us, instead of maces, will we ride through the streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!
Up Fish Street! Down Saint Magnus' Corner! Killand knock down! Throw them into Thames!
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold tosound retreat or parley, when I command them kill?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee: Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the king Unto the commons whom thou hast misled; And here pronounce free pardon to them all That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
What say ye, countrymen? Will ye relent, And yield to mercy whilst 'tis offer'd you; Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths? Who loves the king and will embrace his pardon, Fling up his cap, and say 'God save his majesty!' Who hateth him and honours not his father, Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake, Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
God save the king! God save the king!
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? And you, base peasants, do ye believe him? Will you needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates, that you should leave me at the White Hart in Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out these arms till you had recovered your ancient freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let them break your backs with burthens, take your houses over your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before your faces: for me, I will make shift for one; and so, God's curse light upon you all!
We'll follow Cade, we'll follow Cade!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth, That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him? Will he conduct you through the heart of France, And make the meanest of you earls and dukes? Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to; Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil, Unless by robbing of your friends and us. Were't not a shame, that whilst you live at jar, The fearful French, whom you late vanquished, Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you? Methinks already in this civil broil I see them lording it in London streets, Crying 'Villiago!' unto all they meet. Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy. To France, to France, and get what you have lost; Spare England, for it is your native coast; Henry hath money, you are strong and manly; God on our side, doubt not of victory.
A Clifford! A Clifford! We'll follow the king and Clifford.
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate. I see them lay their heads together to surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have through the very middest of you? And heavens and honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me. But only my followers' base and ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;And he that brings his head unto the kingShall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
Follow me, soldiers: we'll devise a meanTo reconcile you all unto the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne, And could command no more content than I? No sooner was I crept out of my cradle But I was made a king, at nine months old. Was never subject long'd to be a king As I do long and wish to be a subject.
Health and glad tidings to your majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised?Or is he but retired to make him strong?
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield;And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,Expect your highness' doom of life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates, To entertain my vows of thanks and praise! Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives, And show'd how well you love your prince and country: Continue still in this so good a mind, And Henry, though he be infortunate, Assure yourselves, will never be unkind: And so, with thanks and pardon to you all, I do dismiss you to your several countries.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save the king! God save the king!
Please it your grace to be advertised The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland, And with a puissant and a mighty power Of gallowglasses and stout kerns Is marching hitherward in proud array, And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,His arms are only to remove from theeThe Duke of Somerset, whom he terms traitor.
Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd.Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest,Is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate:But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed;And now is York in arms to second him.I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,And ask him what's the reason of these arms.Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower;And, Somerset, we'll commit thee thither,Until his army be dismiss'd from him.
My lord,I'll yield myself to prison willingly,Or unto death, to do my country good.
In any case, be not too rough in terms;For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will, my lord; and doubt not so to dealAs all things shall redound unto your good.
Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better;For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Fie on ambition! Fie on myself, that have a sword, and yet am ready to famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and durst not peep out, for all the country is laid for me; but now am I so hungry that if I might have a lease of my life for a thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore, on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet' was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown bill; and many a time, when I have been dry and bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a quart pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet' must serve me to feed on.
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court, And may enjoy such quiet walks as these? This small inheritance my father left me Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy. I seek not to wax great by others' waning, Or gather wealth, I care not, with what envy: Sufficeth that I have maintains my state And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave. Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow my sword like a great pin, ere thou and I part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be, I know thee not; why, then, should I betray thee? Is't not enough to break into my garden, And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds, Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner, But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
Brave thee! Ay, by the best blood that ever was broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five days; yet, come thou and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands, That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent, Took odds to combat a poor famish'd man. Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine, See if thou canst outface me with thy looks: Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser; Thy hand is but a finger to my fist, Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon; My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast; And if mine arm be heaved in the air, Thy grave is digg'd already in the earth. As for words, whose greatness answers words, Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou mayst be turned to hobnails.
O, I am slain! Famine and no other hath slain me: let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the ten meals I have lost, and I'll defy them all. Wither, garden; and be henceforth a burying-place to all that do dwell in this house, because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor? Sword, I will hollow thee for this thy deed, And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead: Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point; But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat, To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell Kent from me, she hath lost her best man , and exhort all the world to be cowards; for I, that never feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge. Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee; And as I thrust thy body in with my sword, So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell. Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels Unto a dunghill which shall be thy grave, And there cut off thy most ungracious head; Which I will bear in triumph to the king, Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right, And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head: Ring, bells, aloud; burn, bonfires, clear and bright, To entertain great England's lawful king. Ah! Sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear? Let them obey that know not how to rule; This hand was made to handle naught but gold. I cannot give due action to my words, Except a sword or sceptre balance it: A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul, On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.
[Aside ] Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me?The king hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege, To know the reason of these arms in peace; Or why thou, being a subject as I am, Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn, Should raise so great a power without his leave, Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
[Aside] Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great: O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint, I am so angry at these abject terms; And now, like Ajax Telamonius, On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury. I am far better born than is the king, More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts: But I must make fair weather yet a while, Till Henry be more weak and I more strong,— Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me, That I have given no answer all this while; My mind was troubled with deep melancholy. The cause why I have brought this army hither Is to remove proud Somerset from the king, Seditious to his grace and to the state.
That is too much presumption on thy part: But if thy arms be to no other end, The king hath yielded unto thy demand: The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers. Soldiers, I thank you all; disperse yourselves; Meet me to-morrow in St. George's field, You shall have pay and every thing you wish. And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry, Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons, As pledges of my fealty and love; I'll send them all as willing as I live: Lands, goods, horse, armour, any thing I have, Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
York, I commend this kind submission:We twain will go into his highness' tent.
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In all submission and humilityYork doth present himself unto your highness.
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,Who since I heard to be discomfited.
If one so rude and of so mean condition May pass into the presence of a king, Lo, I present your grace a traitor's head, The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!O, let me view his visage, being dead,That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was, an't like your majesty.
How art thou call'd? And what is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's my name;A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king.
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amissHe were created knight for his good service.
Iden, kneel down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rise up a knight.We give thee for reward a thousand marks,And will that thou henceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to merit such a bounty.And never live but true unto his liege!
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen:Go, bid her hide him quickly from the duke.
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,But boldly stand and front him to his face.
How now! Is Somerset at liberty?Then, York, unloose thy long-imprison'd thoughts,And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?False king! Why hast thou broken faith with me,Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?King did I call thee? No, thou art not king,Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,Which darest not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.That head of thine doth not become a crown;Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,Is able with the change to kill and cure.Here is a hand to hold a sceptre upAnd with the same to act controlling laws.Give place: by heaven, thou shalt rule no moreO'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,Of capital treason 'gainst the king and crown;Obey, audacious traitor; kneel for grace.
Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these,If they can brook I bow a knee to man.Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail;
I know, ere they will have me go to ward,They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford! Bid him come amain,To say if that the bastard boys of YorkShall be the surety for their traitor father.
O blood-besotted Neapolitan,Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,Shall be their father's bail; and bane to thoseThat for my surety will refuse the boys!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See where they come: I'll warrant they'llmake it good.
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
Health and all happiness to my lord the king!
I thank thee, Clifford: say, what news with thee?Nay, do not fright us with an angry look;We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again;For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
This is my king, York, I do not mistake;But thou mistakest me much to think I do:To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, Clifford; a bedlam and ambitious humourMakes him oppose himself against his king.
He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is arrested, but will not obey;His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
Will you not, sons?
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and call thy image so: I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor. Call hither to the stake my two brave bears, That with the very shaking of their chains They may astonish these fell-lurking curs: Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.
Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death.And manacle the bear-ward in their chains,If thou darest bring them to the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur Run back and bite, because he was withheld; Who, being suffer'd with the bear's fell paw, Hath clapp'd his tail between his legs and cried: And such a piece of service will you do, If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow? Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair, Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sick son! What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian, And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles? O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty? If it be banish'd from the frosty head, Where shall it find a harbour in the earth? Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war, And shame thine honourable age with blood? Why art thou old, and want'st experience? Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it? For shame! In duty bend thy knee to me That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
My lord, I have consider'd with myself The title of this most renowned duke; And in my conscience do repute his grace The rightful heir to England's royal seat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
I have.
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swear unto a sin, But greater sin to keep a sinful oath. Who can be bound by any solemn vow To do a murderous deed, to rob a man, To force a spotless virgin's chastity, To reave the orphan of his patrimony, To wring the widow from her custom'd right, And have no other reason for this wrong But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,I am resolved for death or dignity.
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm Than any thou canst conjure up to-day; And that I'll write upon thy burgonet, Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, by my father's badge, old Nevil's crest, The rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff, This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet, As on a mountain top the cedar shows That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm, Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bearAnd tread it under foot with all contempt,Despite the bear-ward that protects the bear.
And so to arms, victorious father,To quell the rebels and their complices.
Fie! Charity, for shame! Speak not in spite,For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.
Foul stigmatic, that's more than thou canst tell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls: And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear, Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum And dead men's cries do fill the empty air, Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me: Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland, Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
How now, my noble lord? What, all afoot?
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed, But match to match I have encounter'd him And made a prey for carrion kites and crows Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Of one or both of us the time is come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
Then, nobly, York; 'tis for a crown thou fight'st.As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.
What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So let it help me now against thy swordAs I in justice and true right express it.
My soul and body on the action both!
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
La fin couronne les oeuvres.
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shame and confusion! All is on the rout; Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell, Whom angry heavens do make their minister Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly. He that is truly dedicate to war Hath no self-love, nor he that loves himself Hath not essentially but by circumstance The name of valour.
O, let the vile world end, And the premised flames of the last day Knit earth and heaven together! Now let the general trumpet blow his blast, Particularities and petty sounds To cease! Wast thou ordain'd, dear father, To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve The silver livery of advised age, And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight My heart is turn'd to stone: and while 'tis mine, It shall be stony. York not our old men spares; No more will I their babes: tears virginal Shall be to me even as the dew to fire, And beauty that the tyrant oft reclaims Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax. Henceforth I will not have to do with pity: Meet I an infant of the house of York, Into as many gobbets will I cut it As wild Medea young Absyrtus did: In cruelty will I seek out my fame. Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house: As did AEneas old Anchises bear, So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders; But then AEneas bare a living load, Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
So, lie thou there; For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign, The Castle in Saint Alban's, Somerset Hath made the wizard famous in his death. Sword, hold thy temper; heart, be wrathful still: Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.
Away, my lord! You are slow; for shame, away!
Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What are you made of? You'll nor fight nor fly: Now is it manhood, wisdom and defence, To give the enemy way, and to secure us By what we can, which can no more but fly.
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom Of all our fortunes: but if we haply scape, As well we may, if not through your neglect, We shall to London get, where you are loved And where this breach now in our fortunes made May readily be stopp'd.
But that my heart's on future mischief set, I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly: But fly you must; uncurable discomfit Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts. Away, for your relief! And we will live To see their day and them our fortune give: Away, my lord, away!
Of Salisbury, who can report of him, That winter lion, who in rage forgets Aged contusions and all brush of time, And, like a gallant in the brow of youth, Repairs him with occasion? This happy day Is not itself, nor have we won one foot, If Salisbury be lost.
My noble father, Three times to-day I holp him to his horse, Three times bestrid him; thrice I led him off, Persuaded him from any further act: But still, where danger was, still there I met him; And like rich hangings in a homely house, So was his will in his old feeble body. But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day; By the mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard: God knows how long it is I have to live; And it hath pleased him that three times to-day You have defended me from imminent death. Well, lords, we have not got that which we have: 'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled, Being opposites of such repairing nature.
I know our safety is to follow them; For, as I hear, the king is fled to London, To call a present court of parliament. Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth. What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?
After them! Nay, before them, if we can. Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day: Saint Alban's battle won by famous York Shall be eternized in all age to come. Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all: And more such days as these to us befall!
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.
While we pursued the horsemen of the north, He slily stole away and left his men: Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland, Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat, Cheer'd up the drooping army ; and himself, Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast, Charged our main battle's front, and breaking in Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,Is either slain or wounded dangerously;I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:That this is true, father, behold his blood.
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York, Before I see thee seated in that throne Which now the house of Lancaster usurps, I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close. This is the palace of the fearful king, And this the regal seat: possess it, York; For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'.
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;For hither we have broken in by force.
We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords;And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And when the king comes, offer no violence,Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
The queen this day here holds her parliament,But little thinks we shall be of her council:By words or blows here let us win our right.
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardiceHath made us by-words to our enemies.
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute;I mean to take possession of my right.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits, Even in the chair of state: belike he means, Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer, To aspire unto the crown and reign as king. Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father. And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vow'd revenge On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:He durst not sit there, had your father lived.My gracious lord, here in the parliamentLet us assail the family of York.
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.
Ah, know you not the city favours them,And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]F ar be the thought of this from Henry's heart, To make a shambles of the parliament-house! Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats Shall be the war that Henry means to use. Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne, and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet; I am thy sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.
'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crownIn following this usurping Henry.
Whom should he follow but his natural king?
True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so: content thyself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be king.
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster;And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forgetThat we are those which chased you from the fieldAnd slew your fathers, and with colours spreadMarch'd through the city to the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more livesThan drops of blood were in my father's veins.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,I send thee, Warwick, such a messengerAs shall revenge his death before I stir.
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!
Will you we show our title to the crown?If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown? Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York; Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March: I am the son of Henry the Fifth, Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop And seized upon their towns and provinces.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The lord protector lost it, and not I:When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sons, peace!
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords;And be you silent and attentive too,For he that interrupts him shall not live.
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne, Wherein my grandsire and my father sat? No: first shall war unpeople this my realm; Ay, and their colours, often borne in France, And now in England to our heart's great sorrow, Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords? My title's good, and better far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
'Twas by rebellion against his king.
[Aside] I know not what to say; my title's weak.—Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
What then?
An if he may, then am I lawful king;For Richard, in the view of many lords,Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He rose against him, being his sovereign,And made him to resign his crown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
No; for he could not so resign his crownBut that the next heir should succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.
[Aside] All will revolt from me, and turn to him.
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,Can set the duke up in despite of me.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:May that ground gape and swallow me alive,Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,Or I will fill the house with armed men,And over the chair of state, where now he sits,Write up his title with usurping blood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:Let me for this my life-time reign as king.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!
What good is this to England and himself!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Base, fearful and despairing Henry!
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!
I cannot stay to hear these articles.
Nor I.
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,And die in bands for this unmanly deed!
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, Exeter!
Why should you sigh, my lord?
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son, Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit. But be it as it may: I here entail The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever; Conditionally, that here thou take an oath To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live, To honour me as thy king and sovereign, And neither by treason nor hostility To seek to put me down and reign thyself.
This oath I willingly take and will perform.
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!
Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I to Norfolk with my followers.
And I unto the sea from whence I came.
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:I'll steal away.
Exeter, so will I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
Who can be patient in such extremes? Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid And never seen thee, never borne thee son, Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father. Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus? Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I, Or felt that pain which I did for him once, Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood, Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there, Rather than have that savage duke thine heir And disinherited thine only son.
Father, you cannot disinherit me:If you be king, why should not I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son:The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced? I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch! Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me; And given unto the house of York such head As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance. To entail him and his heirs unto the crown, What is it, but to make thy sepulchre And creep into it far before thy time? Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais; Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas; The duke is made protector of the realm; And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds The trembling lamb environed with wolves. Had I been there, which am a silly woman, The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes Before I would have granted to that act. But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour: And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed, Until that act of parliament be repeal'd Whereby my son is disinherited. The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours Will follow mine, if once they see them spread; And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace And utter ruin of the house of York. Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away; Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I return with victory from the fieldI'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son Hath made her break out into terms of rage! Revenged may she be on that hateful duke, Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire, Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle Tire on the flesh of me and of my son! The loss of those three lords torments my heart: I'll write unto them and entreat them fair. Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I can better play the orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
Why, how now, sons and brother! At a strife?What is your quarrel? How began it first?
No quarrel, but a slight contention.
About what?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]About that which concerns your grace and us;The crown of England, father, which is yours.
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.
Your right depends not on his life or death.
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,It will outrun you, father, in the end.
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn.
I shall be, if I claim by open war.
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An oath is of no moment, being not took Before a true and lawful magistrate, That hath authority over him that swears: Henry had none, but did usurp the place; Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose, Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous. Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown; Within whose circuit is Elysium And all that poets feign of bliss and joy. Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest Until the white rose that I wear be dyed Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die. Brother, thou shalt to London presently, And whet on Warwick to this enterprise. Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk, And tell him privily of our intent. You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham, With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise: In them I trust; for they are soldiers, Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit. While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more, But that I seek occasion how to rise, And yet the king not privy to my drift, Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?
The queen with all the northern earls and lordsIntend here to besiege you in your castle:She is hard by with twenty thousand men;And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them? Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me; My brother Montague shall post to London: Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest, Whom we have left protectors of the king, With powerful policy strengthen themselves, And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not:And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;The army of the queen mean to besiege us.
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.
What, with five thousand men?
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:A woman's general; what should we fear?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hear their drums: let's set our men in order,And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
Five men to twenty! Though the odds be great, I doubt not, uncle, of our victory. Many a battle have I won in France, When as the enemy hath been ten to one: Why should I not now have the like success?
Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands?Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!
Chaplain, away! Thy priesthood saves thy life.As for the brat of this accursed duke,Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soldiers, away with him!
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,Lest thou be hated both of God and man!
How now! is he dead already? Or is it fearThat makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch That trembles under his devouring paws; And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey, And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder. Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword, And not with such a cruel threatening look. Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die. I am too mean a subject for thy wrath: Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's bloodHath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then let my father's blood open it again:He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine Were not revenge sufficient for me; No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves And hung their rotten coffins up in chains, It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart. The sight of any of the house of York Is as a fury to torment my soul; And till I root out their accursed line And leave not one alive, I live in hell. Therefore—
O, let me pray before I take my death!To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy father hath.
But 'twas ere I was born. Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me, Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just, He be as miserably slain as I. Ah, let me live in prison all my days; And when I give occasion of offence, Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause!Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!And this thy son's blood cleaving to my bladeShall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The army of the queen hath got the field: My uncles both are slain in rescuing me; And all my followers to the eager foe Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves. My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them: But this I know, they have demean'd themselves Like men born to renown by life or death. Three times did Richard make a lane to me. And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!' And full as oft came Edward to my side, With purple falchion, painted to the hilt In blood of those that had encounter'd him: And when the hardiest warriors did retire, Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!' And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb! A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!' With this, we charged again: but, out, alas! We bodged again; as I have seen a swan With bootless labour swim against the tide And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue; And I am faint and cannot fly their fury: And were I strong, I would not shun their fury: The sands are number'd that make up my life; Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:I am your butt, and I abide your shot.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,With downright payment, show'd unto my father.Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,And made an evening at the noontide prick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth A bird that will revenge upon you all: And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven, Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with. Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again, And in thy thought o'er-run my former time; And, if though canst for blushing, view this face, And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
I will not bandy with thee word for word,But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causesI would prolong awhile the traitor's life.Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart: What valour were it, when a cur doth grin, For one to thrust his hand between his teeth, When he might spurn him with his foot away? It is war's prize to take all vantages; And ten to one is no impeach of valour.
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
So doth the cony struggle in the net.
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.
What would your grace have done unto him now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland, Come, make him stand upon this molehill here, That wrought at mountains with outstretched arms, Yet parted but the shadow with his hand. What! was it you that would be England's king? Was't you that revell'd in our parliament, And made a preachment of your high descent? Where are your mess of sons to back you now? The wanton Edward, and the lusty George? And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy, Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies? Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland? Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point, Made issue from the bosom of the boy; And if thine eyes can water for his death, I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal. Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly, I should lament thy miserable state. I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York. What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death? Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad; And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus. Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance. Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport: York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown. A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him: Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king! Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair, And this is he was his adopted heir. But how is it that great Plantagenet Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath? As I bethink me, you should not be king Till our King Henry had shook hands with death. And will you pale your head in Henry's glory, And rob his temples of the diadem, Now in his life, against your holy oath? O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!Off with the crown, and with the crown his head;And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for my father's sake.
Nay, stay; lets hear the orisons he makes.
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France, Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth! How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex To triumph, like an Amazonian trull, Upon their woes whom fortune captivates! But that thy face is, visor-like, unchanging, Made impudent with use of evil deeds, I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush. To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived, Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless. Thy father bears the type of King of Naples, Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem, Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman. Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult? It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen, Unless the adage must be verified, That beggars mounted run their horse to death. 'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud; But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small: 'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired; The contrary doth make thee wonder'd at: 'Tis government that makes them seem divine; The want thereof makes thee abominable: Thou art as opposite to every good As the Antipodes are unto us, Or as the south to the septentrion. O tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide! How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child, To bid the father wipe his eyes withal, And yet be seen to bear a woman's face? Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible; Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless. Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish: Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will: For raging wind blows up incessant showers, And when the rage allays, the rain begins. These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies: And every drop cries vengeance for his death, 'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false Frenchwoman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beshrew me, but his passion moves me soThat hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.
That face of his the hungry cannibals Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood: But you are more inhuman, more inexorable, O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania. See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears: This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy, And I with tears do wash the blood away. Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this: And if thou tell'st the heavy story right, Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears; Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears, And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!' There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse; And in thy need such comfort come to thee As now I reap at thy too cruel hand! Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world: My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,I should not for my life but weep with him.To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?Think but upon the wrong he did us all,And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;So York may overlook the town of York.
I wonder how our princely father 'scaped, Or whether he be 'scaped away or no From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit: Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news; Had he been slain, we should have heard the news; Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard The happy tidings of his good escape. How fares my brother? why is he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I be resolved Where our right valiant father is become. I saw him in the battle range about; And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth. Methought he bore him in the thickest troop As doth a lion in a herd of neat; Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs, Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry, The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him. So fared our father with his enemies; So fled his enemies my warlike father: Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son. See how the morning opes her golden gates, And takes her farewell of the glorious sun! How well resembles it the prime of youth, Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun; Not separated with the racking clouds, But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky. See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss, As if they vow'd some league inviolable: Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun. In this the heaven figures some event.
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of. I think it cites us, brother, to the field, That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet, Each one already blazing by our meeds, Should notwithstanding join our lights together And over-shine the earth as this the world. Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear Upon my target three fair-shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,You love the breeder better than the male.
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretellSome dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, one that was a woeful looker-onWhenas the noble Duke of York was slain,Your princely father and my loving lord!
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
Environed he was with many foes, And stood against them, as the hope of Troy Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy. But Hercules himself must yield to odds; And many strokes, though with a little axe, Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak. By many hands your father was subdued; But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen, Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite, Laugh'd in his face; and when with grief he wept, The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks A napkin steeped in the harmless blood Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain: And after many scorns, many foul taunts, They took his head, and on the gates of York They set the same; and there it doth remain, The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon, Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay. O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! Thou hast slain The flower of Europe for his chivalry; And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him, For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee. Now my soul's palace is become a prison: Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body Might in the ground be closed up in rest! For never henceforth shall I joy again, Never, O never shall I see more joy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot weep; for all my body's moisture Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart: Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen; For selfsame wind that I should speak withal Is kindling coals that fires all my breast, And burns me up with flames that tears would quench. To weep is to make less the depth of grief: Tears, then, for babes—blows and revenge for me! Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death, Or die renowned by attempting it.
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun:For "chair and dukedom," "throne and kingdom" say;Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
How now, fair lords! What fare? What news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recountOur baleful news, and at each word's deliveranceStab poniards in our flesh till all were told,The words would add more anguish than the wounds.O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Warwick, Warwick! That Plantagenet,Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption,Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears; And now, to add more measure to your woes, I come to tell you things sith then befall'n. After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought, Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp, Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run, Were brought me of your loss and his depart. I, then in London keeper of the king, Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends, And very well appointed, as I thought, March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen, Bearing the king in my behalf along; For by my scouts I was advertised That she was coming with a full intent To dash our late decree in parliament Touching King Henry's oath and your succession. Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban's met Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought: But whether 'twas the coldness of the king, Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen, That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen; Or whether 'twas report of her success; Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour, Who thunders to his captives blood and death, I cannot judge : but to conclude with truth, Their weapons like to lightning came and went; Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight, Or like an idle thresher with a flail, Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends. I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause, With promise of high pay and great rewards: But all in vain; they had no heart to fight, And we in them no hope to win the day; So that we fled; the king unto the queen; Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself, In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you: For in the marches here we heard you were, Making another head to fight again.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;And for your brother, he was lately sentFrom your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,With aid of soldiers to this needful war.
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear; For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head, And wring the awful sceptre from his fist, Were he as famous and as bold in war As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not: 'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak. But in this troublous time what's to be done? Shall we go throw away our coats of steel, And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns, Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads? Or shall we on the helmets of our foes Tell our devotion with revengeful arms? If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out; And therefore comes my brother Montague. Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen, With Clifford and the haught Northumberland, And of their feather many more proud birds, Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax. He swore consent to your succession, His oath enrolled in the parliament; And now to London all the crew are gone, To frustrate both his oath and what beside May make against the house of Lancaster. Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong: Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself, With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March, Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure, Will but amount to five and twenty thousand, Why, Via! To London will we march amain, And once again bestride our foaming steeds, And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!' But never once again turn back and fly.
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day,That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;And when thou fail'st—as God forbid the hour!—Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York: The next degree is England's royal throne; For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd In every borough as we pass along; And he that throws not up his cap for joy Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head. King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague, Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown, But sound the trumpets, and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!
How now! What news?
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,The queen is coming with a puissant host;And craves your company for speedy counsel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.Yonder's the head of that arch-enemyThat sought to be encompass'd with your crown:Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:To see this sight, it irks my very soul.Withhold revenge, dear God! 'Tis not my fault,Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity And harmful pity must be laid aside. To whom do lions cast their gentle looks? Not to the beast that would usurp their den. Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick? Not his that spoils her young before her face. Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting? Not he that sets his foot upon her back. The smallest worm will turn being trodden on, And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood. Ambitious York doth level at thy crown, Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows: He, but a duke, would have his son a king, And raise his issue, like a loving sire; Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son, Didst yield consent to disinherit him, Which argued thee a most unloving father. Unreasonable creatures feed their young; And though man's face be fearful to their eyes, Yet, in protection of their tender ones, Who hath not seen them, even with those wings Which sometime they have used with fearful flight, Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest, Offer their own lives in their young's defence? For shame, my liege, make them your precedent! Were it not pity that this goodly boy Should lose his birthright by his father's fault, And long hereafter say unto his child, 'What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got My careless father fondly gave away'? Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy; And let his manly face, which promiseth Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator, Inferring arguments of mighty force. But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear That things ill-got had ever bad success? And happy always was it for that son Whose father for his hoarding went to hell? I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind; And would my father had left me no more! For all the rest is held at such a rate As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep Than in possession and jot of pleasure. Ah, cousin York! Would thy best friends did know How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh, And this soft courage makes your followers faint. You promised knighthood to our forward son: Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently. Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,And in that quarrel use it to the death.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
Royal commanders, be in readiness: For with a band of thirty thousand men Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York; And in the towns, as they do march along, Proclaims him king, and many fly to him: Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would your highness would depart the field:The queen hath best success when you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.
Be it with resolution then to fight.
My royal father, cheer these noble lordsAnd hearten those that fight in your defence:Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, perjured Henry! Wilt thou kneel for grace,And set thy diadem upon my head;Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!Becomes it thee to be thus bold in termsBefore thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
I am his king, and he should bow his knee;I was adopted heir by his consent:Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,Have caused him, by new act of parliament,To blot out me, and put his own son in.
And reason too:Who should succeed the father but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,Or any he the proudest of thy sort.
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! Dare you speak?When you and I met at Saint Alban's last,Your legs did better service than your hands.
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrainThe execution of my big-swoln heartUpon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:I am a king, and privileged to speak.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting hereCannot be cured by words; therefore be still.
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:By him that made us all, I am resolvedthat Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;For York in justice puts his armour on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If that be right which Warwick says is right,There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,Whose father bears the title of a king,—As if a channel should be call'd the sea,—Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns, To make this shameless callet know herself. Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou, Although thy husband may be Menelaus; And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd By that false woman, as this king by thee. His father revell'd in the heart of France, And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop; And had he match'd according to his state, He might have kept that glory to this day; But when he took a beggar to his bed, And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day, Even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him, That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France, And heap'd sedition on his crown at home. For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride? Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept; And we, in pity of the gentle king, Had slipp'd our claim until another age.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring, And that thy summer bred us no increase, We set the axe to thy usurping root; And though the edge hath something hit ourselves, Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike, We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down, Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
And, in this resolution, I defy thee;Not willing any longer conference,Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.Sound trumpets! Let our bloody colours wave!And either victory, or else a grave.
Stay, Edward.
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race, I lay me down a little while to breathe; For strokes received, and many blows repaid, Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength, And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Smile, gentle heaven! Or strike, ungentle death!For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.
How now, my lord! What hap? What hope of good?
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself? Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk, Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance; And in the very pangs of death he cried, Like to a dismal clangour heard from far, 'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!' So, underneath the belly of their steeds, That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood, The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then let the earth be drunken with our blood: I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly. Why stand we like soft-hearted women here, Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage; And look upon, as if the tragedy Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors? Here on my knee I vow to God above, I'll never pause again, never stand still, Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine; And in this vow do chain my soul to thine! And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face, I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee, Thou setter up and plucker down of kings, Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands That to my foes this body must be prey, Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope, And give sweet passage to my sinful soul! Now, lords, take leave until we meet again, Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:I, that did never weep, now melt with woeThat winter should cut off our spring-time so.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.
Yet let us all together to our troops, And give them leave to fly that will not stay; And call them pillars that will stand to us; And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards As victors wear at the Olympian games: This may plant courage in their quailing breasts; For yet is hope of life and victory. Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone: This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York; And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland; And here's the heart that triumphs in their death And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother To execute the like upon thyself; And so, have at thee!
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
This battle fares like to the morning's war, When dying clouds contend with growing light, What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails, Can neither call it perfect day nor night. Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea Forced by the tide to combat with the wind; Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea Forced to retire by fury of the wind: Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind; Now one the better, then another best; Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast, Yet neither conqueror nor conquered: So is the equal poise of this fell war. Here on this molehill will I sit me down. To whom God will, there be the victory! For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too, Have chid me from the battle; swearing both They prosper best of all when I am thence. Would I were dead! if God's good will were so; For what is in this world but grief and woe? O God! methinks it were a happy life, To be no better than a homely swain; To sit upon a hill, as I do now, To carve out dials quaintly, point by point, Thereby to see the minutes how they run, How many make the hour full complete; How many hours bring about the day; How many days will finish up the year; How many years a mortal man may live. When this is known, then to divide the times: So many hours must I tend my flock; So many hours must I take my rest; So many hours must I contemplate; So many hours must I sport myself; So many days my ewes have been with young; So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean: So many years ere I shall shear the fleece: So minutes, hours, days, months, and years, Pass'd over to the end they were created, Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave. Ah, what a life were this! How sweet! How lovely! Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade To shepherds looking on their silly sheep, Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy To kings that fear their subjects' treachery? O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth. And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds, His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle. His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade, All which secure and sweetly he enjoys, Is far beyond a prince's delicates, His viands sparkling in a golden cup, His body couched in a curious bed, When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody. This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight, May be possessed with some store of crowns ; And I, that haply take them from him now, May yet ere night yield both my life and them To some man else, as this dead man doth me. Who's this? O God! It is my father's face, Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd. O heavy times, begetting such events! From London by the king was I press'd forth; My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man, Came on the part of York, press'd by his master; And I, who at his hands received my life, him Have by my hands of life bereaved him. Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did! And pardon, father, for I knew not thee! My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks; And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O piteous spectacle! O bloody times! Whiles lions war and battle for their dens, Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity. Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear; And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war, Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me, Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold: For I have bought it with an hundred blows. But let me see: is this our foeman's face? Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son! Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee, Throw up thine eye! See, see what showers arise, Blown with the windy tempest of my heart, Upon thy wounds, that kill mine eye and heart! O, pity, God, this miserable age! What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly, Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural, This deadly quarrel daily doth beget! O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon, And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
Woe above woe! Grief more than common grief! O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds! O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity! The red rose and the white are on his face, The fatal colours of our striving houses: The one his purple blood right well resembles; The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth: Wither one rose, and let the other flourish; If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
How will my mother for a father's deathTake on with me and ne'er be satisfied!
How will my wife for slaughter of my sonShed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How will the country for these woeful chancesMisthink the king and not be satisfied!
Was ever son so rued a father's death?
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet; My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre, For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go; My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell; And so obsequious will thy father be, Even for the loss of thee, having no more, As Priam was for all his valiant sons. I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will, For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,Here sits a king more woeful than you are.
Fly, father, fly! For all your friends are fled,And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:Away! For death doth hold us in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain: Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds Having the fearful flying hare in sight, With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath, And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands, Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.
Away! For vengeance comes along with them:Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;Or else come after: I'll away before.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:Not that I fear to stay, but love to goWhither the queen intends. Forward; away!
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies, Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light. O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow More than my body's parting with my soul! My love and fear glued many friends to thee; And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts. Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York, The common people swarm like summer flies; And whither fly the gnats but to the sun? And who shines now but Henry's enemies? O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds, Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth! And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do, Or as thy father and his father did, Giving no ground unto the house of York, They never then had sprung like summer flies; I and ten thousand in this luckless realm Had left no mourning widows for our death; And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace. For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air? And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity? Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds; No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight: The foe is merciless, and will not pity; For at their hands I have deserved no pity. The air hath got into my deadly wounds, And much effuse of blood doth make me faint. Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest; I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause, And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks. Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen, That led calm Henry, though he were a king, As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust, Command an argosy to stem the waves. But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,For, though before his face I speak the wordsYour brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,If friend or foe, let him be gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford; Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth, But set his murdering knife unto the root From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring, I mean our princely father, Duke of York.
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;Instead whereof let this supply the room:Measure for measure must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,That nothing sung but death to us and ours:Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think his understanding is bereft.Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
O, would he did! And so perhaps he doth:'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,Because he would avoid such bitter tauntsWhich in the time of death he gave our father.
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? Nay, then the world goes hard When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath. I know by that he's dead ; and, by my soul, If this right hand would buy two hour's life, That I in all despite might rail at him, This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head, And rear it in the place your father's stands. And now to London with triumphant march, There to be crowned England's royal king: From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France, And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen: So shalt thou sinew both these lands together; And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again; For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt, Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears. First will I see the coronation; And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea, To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be; For in thy shoulder do I build my seat, And never will I undertake the thing Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting. Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester, And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself, Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, that's a foolish observation:Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,To see these honours in possession.
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves;For through this laund anon the deer will come;And in this covert will we make our stand,Culling the principal of all the deer.
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost. Here stand we both, and aim we at the best: And, for the time shall not seem tedious, I'll tell thee what befell me on a day In this self-place where now we mean to stand.
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love, To greet mine own land with my wishful sight. No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine; Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee, Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed: No bending knee will call thee Caesar now, No humble suitors press to speak for right, No, not a man comes for redress of thee; For how can I help them, and not myself?
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:This is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,For wise men say it is the wisest course.
Why linger we? Let us lay hands upon him.
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My queen and son are gone to France for aid; And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister To wife for Edward: if this news be true, Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost; For Warwick is a subtle orator, And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words. By this account then Margaret may win him; For she's a woman to be pitied much: Her sighs will make a battery in his breast; Her tears will pierce into a marble heart; The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn; And Nero will be tainted with remorse, To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears. Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give; She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry, He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward. She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed; He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd; That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more; Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong, Inferreth arguments of mighty strength, And in conclusion wins the king from her, With promise of his sister, and what else, To strengthen and support King Edward's place. O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul, Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:A man at least, for less I should not be;And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
Why, so I am, in mind; and that's enough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
Well, if you be a king crown'd with content, Your crown content and you must be contented To go along with us; for as we think, You are the king King Edward hath deposed; And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance Will apprehend you as his enemy.
But did you never swear, and break an oath?
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where did you dwell when I was King of England?
Here in this country, where we now remain.
I was anointed king at nine months old;My father and my grandfather were kings,And you were sworn true subjects unto me:And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
No;For we were subjects but while you were king.
Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man? Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear! Look, as I blow this feather from my face, And as the air blows it to me again, Obeying with my wind when I do blow, And yielding to another when it blows, Commanded always by the greater gust; Such is the lightness of you common men. But do not break your oaths; for of that sin My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty. Go where you will, the king shall be commanded; And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.
So would you be again to Henry,If he were seated as King Edward is.
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,To go with us unto the officers.
In God's name, lead; your king's name be obey'd:And what God will, that let your king perform;And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain, His lands then seized on by the conqueror: Her suit is now to repossess those lands; Which we in justice cannot well deny, Because in quarrel of the house of York The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;It were dishonour to deny it her.
It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.
[Aside to CLARENCE] Yea, is it so?I see the lady hath a thing to grant,Before the king will grant her humble suit.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game: how truehe keeps the wind!
[Aside to CLARENCE] Silence!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Widow, we will consider of your suit;And come some other time to know our mind.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:May it please your highness to resolve me now;And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.
[Aside to CLARENCE] Ay, widow? Then I'll warrantyou all your lands,An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I fear her not, unless shechance to fall.
[Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that! For he'lltake vantages.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How many children hast thou, widow? Tell me.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I think he means to beg achild of her.
[Aside to CLARENCE] Nay, whip me then: he'll rathergive her two.
Three, my most gracious lord.
[Aside to CLARENCE] You shall have four, if you'llbe ruled by him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.
[Aside to CLARENCE] Ay, good leave have you; foryou will have leave,Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
And would you not do much to do them good?
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
Therefore I came unto your majesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?
What you command, that rests in me to do.
But you will take exceptions to my boon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.
[Aside to CLARENCE] He plies her hard; and much rainwears the marble.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] As red as fire! nay, thenher wax must melt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to CLARENCE] The match is made; she seals itwith a curtsy.
But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
My mind will never grant what I perceiveYour highness aims at, if I aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;For by that loss I will not purchase them.
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.But, mighty lord, this merry inclinationAccords not with the sadness of my suit:Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request;No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.
[Aside to CLARENCE] The widow likes him not, sheknits her brows.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] He is the bluntest wooer inChristendom.
[Aside] Her looks do argue her replete with modesty; Her words do show her wit incomparable; All her perfections challenge sovereignty: One way or other, she is for a king; And she shall be my love, or else my queen.[To LADY GREY]Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:I am a subject fit to jest withal,But far unfit to be a sovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to theeI speak no more than what my soul intends;And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
And that is more than I will yield unto:I know I am too mean to be your queen,And yet too good to be your concubine.
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.
'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more than when my daughters call thee mother. Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children; And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor, Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing To be the father unto many sons. Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
[Aside to CLARENCE] The ghostly father now hath donehis shrift.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER] When he was made a shriver,'twas for shift.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You'll think it strange if I should marry her.
To whom, my lord?
Why, Clarence, to myself.
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By so much is the wonder in extremes.
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you bothHer suit is granted for her husband's lands.
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,To question of his apprehension.Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.
Ay, Edward will use women honourably. Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all, That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring, To cross me from the golden time I look for! And yet, between my soul's desire and me— The lustful Edward's title buried— Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward, And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies, To take their rooms, ere I can place myself: A cold premeditation for my purpose! Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty; Like one that stands upon a promontory, And spies a far-off shore where he would tread, Wishing his foot were equal with his eye, And chides the sea that sunders him from thence, Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way: So do I wish the crown, being so far off; And so I chide the means that keeps me from it; And so I say, I'll cut the causes off, Flattering me with impossibilities. My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much, Unless my hand and strength could equal them. Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard; What other pleasure can the world afford? I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap, And deck my body in gay ornaments, And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks. O miserable thought! And more unlikely Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns! Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb: And, for I should not deal in her soft laws, She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe, To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub; To make an envious mountain on my back, Where sits deformity to mock my body; To shape my legs of an unequal size; To disproportion me in every part, Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp That carries no impression like the dam. And am I then a man to be beloved? O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought! Then, since this earth affords no joy to me, But to command, to check, to o'erbear such As are of better person than myself, I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown, And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell, Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head Be round impaled with a glorious crown. And yet I know not how to get the crown, For many lives stand between me and home: And I,—like one lost in a thorny wood, That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns, Seeking a way and straying from the way; Not knowing how to find the open air, But toiling desperately to find it out,— Torment myself to catch the English crown: And from that torment I will free myself, Or hew my way out with a bloody axe. Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile, And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart, And wet my cheeks with artificial tears, And frame my face to all occasions. I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall; I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk; I'll play the orator as well as Nestor, Deceive more slily than Ulysses could, And, like a Sinon, take another Troy. I can add colours to the chameleon, Change shapes with Proteus for advantages, And set the murderous Machiavel to school. Can I do this, and cannot get a crown? Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,Sit down with us: it ill befits thy stateAnd birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve Where kings command. I was, I must confess, Great Albion's queen in former golden days: But now mischance hath trod my title down, And with dishonour laid me on the ground; Where I must take like seat unto my fortune, And to my humble seat conform myself.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tearsAnd stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,And sit thee by our side:
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yield not thy neck To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind Still ride in triumph over all mischance. Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief; It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak. Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis, That Henry, sole possessor of my love, Is of a king become a banish'd man, And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn; While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York Usurps the regal title and the seat Of England's true-anointed lawful king. This is the cause that I, poor Margaret, With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir, Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid; And if thou fail us, all our hope is done: Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help; Our people and our peers are both misled, Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight, And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,While we bethink a means to break it off.
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;For this is he that moves both wind and tide.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From worthy Edward, King of Albion, My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend, I come, in kindness and unfeigned love, First, to do greetings to thy royal person; And then to crave a league of amity; And lastly, to confirm that amity With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister, To England's king in lawful marriage.
[Aside] If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.
[To BONA] A nd, gracious madam, in our king's behalf, I am commanded, with your leave and favour, Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart; Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears, Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak, Before you answer Warwick. His demand Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love, But from deceit bred by necessity; For how can tyrants safely govern home, Unless abroad they purchase great alliance? To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice, That Henry liveth still: but were he dead, Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son. Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour; For though usurpers sway the rule awhile, Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
Injurious Margaret!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And why not queen?
Because thy father Henry did usurp;And thou no more are prince than she is queen.
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt, Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain; And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth, Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest; And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth, Who by his prowess conquered all France: From these our Henry lineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse, You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost All that which Henry Fifth had gotten? Methinks these peers of France should smile at that. But for the rest, you tell a pedigree Of threescore and two years; a silly time To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,And not bewray thy treason with a blush?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?For shame! Leave Henry, and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whose injurious doom My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere, Was done to death? And more than so, my father, Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years, When nature brought him to the door of death? No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm, This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
And I the house of York.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,While I use further conference with Warwick.
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,Is Edward your true king? For I were loathTo link with him that were not lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.
But is he gracious in the people's eye?
The more that Henry was unfortunate.
Then further, all dissembling set aside,Tell me for truth the measure of his loveUnto our sister Bona.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such it seems As may beseem a monarch like himself. Myself have often heard him say and swear That this his love was an eternal plant, Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground, The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun, Exempt from envy, but not from disdain, Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:[to WARWICK]Yet I confess that often ere this day,When I have heard your king's desert recounted,Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's; And now forthwith shall articles be drawn Touching the jointure that your king must make, Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised. Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
To Edward, but not to the English king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Deceitful Warwick! It was thy deviceBy this alliance to make void my suit:Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.
And still is friend to him and Margaret: But if your title to the crown be weak, As may appear by Edward's good success, Then 'tis but reason that I be released From giving aid which late I promised. Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand That your estate requires and mine can yield.
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease, Where having nothing, nothing can he lose. And as for you yourself, our quondam queen, You have a father able to maintain you; And better 'twere you troubled him than France.
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace, Proud setter up and puller down of kings! I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears, Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love; For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To WARWICK] My lord ambassador, these letters are foryou,Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague.
These from our king unto your majesty.
And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not.
I like it well that our fair queen and mistressSmiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:I hope all's for the best.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair queen?
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
What! Has your king married the Lady Grey! And now, to soothe your forgery and his, Sends me a paper to persuade me patience? Is this the alliance that he seeks with France? Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
I told your majesty as much before:This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven, And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss, That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's, No more my king, for he dishonours me, But most himself, if he could see his shame. Did I forget that by the house of York My father came untimely to his death? Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece? Did I impale him with the regal crown? Did I put Henry from his native right? And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame? Shame on himself! For my desert is honour: And to repair my honour lost for him, I here renounce him and return to Henry. My noble queen, let former grudges pass, And henceforth I am thy true servitor: I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona, And replant Henry in his former state.
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;And I forgive and quite forget old faults,And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend, That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us With some few bands of chosen soldiers, I'll undertake to land them on our coast And force the tyrant from his seat by war. 'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him: And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me, He's very likely now to fall from him, For matching more for wanton lust than honour, Or than for strength and safety of our country.
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revengedBut by thy help to this distressed queen?
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My quarrel and this English queen's are one.
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.Therefore at last I firmly am resolvedYou shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.
Then, England's messenger, return in post,And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,That Lewis of France is sending over masquersTo revel it with him and his new bride:Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,And I am ready to put armour on.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.There's thy reward: be gone.
But, Warwick, Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men, Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle; And, as occasion serves, this noble queen And prince shall follow with a fresh supply. Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt, What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
This shall assure my constant loyalty,That if our queen and this young prince agree,I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joyTo him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion. Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous, Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick; And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable, That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied, And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral, Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet. I long till Edward fall by war's mischance, For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
I came from Edward as ambassador, But I return his sworn and mortal foe: Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me, But dreadful war shall answer his demand. Had he none else to make a stale but me? Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow. I was the chief that raised him to the crown, And I'll be chief to bring him down again: Not that I pity Henry's misery, But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think youOf this new marriage with the Lady Grey?Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France;How could he stay till Warwick made return?
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king.
And his well-chosen bride.
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,Which are so weak of courage and in judgmentThat they'll take no offence at our abuse.
Suppose they take offence without a cause,They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.
And shall have your will, because our king:Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
Not I:No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'dWhom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pityTo sunder them that yoke so well together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Setting your scorns and your mislike aside, Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey Should not become my wife and England's queen. And you too, Somerset and Montague, Speak freely what you think.
Then this is mine opinion: that King LewisBecomes your enemy, for mocking himAbout the marriage of the Lady Bona.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeasedBy such invention as I can devise?
Yet, to have join'd with France in such allianceWould more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, knows not Montague that of itselfEngland is safe, if true within itself?
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.
'Tis better using France than trusting France: Let us be back'd with God and with the seas Which He hath given for fence impregnable, And with their helps only defend ourselves; In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deservesTo have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Ay, what of that? It was my will and grant;And for this once my will shall stand for law.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And yet methinks your grace hath not done well, To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales Unto the brother of your loving bride; She better would have fitted me or Clarence: But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heirOf the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence! Is it for a wifeThat thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,Which being shallow, you give me leaveTo play the broker in mine own behalf;And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,And not be tied unto his brother's will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lords, before it pleased his majesty To raise my state to title of a queen, Do me but right, and you must all confess That I was not ignoble of descent; And meaner than myself have had like fortune. But as this title honours me and mine, So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing, Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns: What danger or what sorrow can befall thee, So long as Edward is thy constant friend, And their true sovereign, whom they must obey? Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too, Unless they seek for hatred at my hands; Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe, And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
[Aside] I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
Now, messenger, what letters or what newsFrom France?
My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words,But such as I, without your special pardon,Dare not relate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
At my depart, these were his very words:'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,That Lewis of France is sending over masquersTo revel it with him and his new bride.'
Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?
These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain:'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'
I blame not her, she could say little less;She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?For I have heard that she was there in place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,And I am ready to put armour on.'
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He, more incensed against your majestyThan all the rest, discharged me with these words:'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd:They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd infriendshipThat young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger. Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast, For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter; That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage I may not prove inferior to yourself. You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
[Aside] Not I:My thoughts aim at a further matter; IStay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick! Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen; And haste is needful in this desperate case. Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf Go levy men, and make prepare for war; They are already, or quickly will be landed: Myself in person will straight follow you.
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague, Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest, Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance: Tell me if you love Warwick more than me? If it be so, then both depart to him; I rather wish you foes than hollow friends: But if you mind to hold your true obedience, Give me assurance with some friendly vow, That I may never have you in suspect.
So God help Montague as he proves true!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
Why, so! Then am I sure of victory.Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour,Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;The common people by numbers swarm to us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But see where Somerset and Clarence come!Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
Fear not that, my lord.
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick; And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice To rest mistrustful where a noble heart Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love; Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother, Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings: But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine. And now what rests but, in night's coverture, Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd, His soldiers lurking in the towns about, And but attended by a simple guard, We may surprise and take him at our pleasure? Our scouts have found the adventure very easy: That as Ulysses and stout Diomede With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents, And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds, So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle, At unawares may beat down Edward's guard And seize himself; I say not, slaughter him, For I intend but only to surprise him. You that will follow me to this attempt, Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
Why, then, let's on our way in silent sort:For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:The king by this is set him down to sleep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, will he not to bed?
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vowNever to lie and take his natural restTill Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,If Warwick be so near as men report.
But say, I pray, what nobleman is thatThat with the king here resteth in his tent?
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, is it so? But why commands the kingThat his chief followers lodge in towns about him,While he himself keeps in the cold field?
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;I like it better than a dangerous honour.If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,But to defend his person from night-foes?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.Courage, my masters! Honour now or never!But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Who goes there?
Stay, or thou diest!
What are they that fly there?
Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,Thou call'dst me king.
Ay, but the case is alter'd: When you disgraced me in my embassade, Then I degraded you from being king, And come now to create you Duke of York. Alas! How should you govern any kingdom, That know not how to use ambassadors, Nor how to be contented with one wife, Nor how to use your brothers brotherly, Nor how to study for the people's welfare, Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too? Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down. Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance, Of thee thyself and all thy complices, Edward will always bear himself as king: Though fortune's malice overthrow my state, My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
But Henry now shall wear the English crown, And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow. My Lord of Somerset, at my request, See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd Unto my brother, Archbishop of York. When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows, I'll follow you, and tell what answer Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him. Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What fates impose, that men must needs abide;It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
What now remains, my lords, for us to doBut march to London with our soldiers?
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;To free King Henry from imprisonmentAnd see him seated in the regal throne.
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learnWhat late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What! Loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?
No, but the loss of his own royal person.
Then is my sovereign slain?
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner, Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard Or by his foe surprised at unawares: And, as I further have to understand, Is new committed to the Bishop of York, Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.
These news I must confess are full of grief;Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay. And I the rather wean me from despair For love of Edward's offspring in my womb: This is it that makes me bridle passion And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross; Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs, Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
I am inform'd that he comes towards London, To set the crown once more on Henry's head: Guess thou the rest; King Edward's friends must down, But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,— For trust not him that hath once broken faith,— I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary, To save at least the heir of Edward's right: There shall I rest secure from force and fraud. Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly: If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley, Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither, Into this chiefest thicket of the park. Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother, Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands He hath good usage and great liberty, And, often but attended with weak guard, Comes hunting this way to disport himself. I have advertised him by secret means That if about this hour he make his way Under the colour of his usual game, He shall here find his friends with horse and men To set him free from his captivity.
This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.
But whither shall we then?
To Lynn, my lord,And ship from thence to Flanders.
Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we? 'Tis no time to talk.
Huntsman, what say'st thou? Wilt thou go along?
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.
Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown;And pray that I may repossess the crown.
Master lieutenant, now that God and friendsHave shaken Edward from the regal seat,And turn'd my captive state to liberty,My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;But if an humble prayer may prevail,I then crave pardon of your majesty.
For what, lieutenant? For well using me? Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness, For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure; Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds Conceive when after many moody thoughts At last by notes of household harmony They quite forget their loss of liberty. But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free, And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee; He was the author, thou the instrument. Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me, And that the people of this blessed land May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars, Warwick, although my head still wear the crown, I here resign my government to thee, For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous; And now may seem as wise as virtuous, By spying and avoiding fortune's malice, For few men rightly temper with the stars: Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace, For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,To whom the heavens in thy nativityAdjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,As likely to be blest in peace and war;And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
And I choose Clarence only for protector.
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands: Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts, That no dissension hinder government: I make you both protectors of this land, While I myself will lead a private life And in devotion spend my latter days, To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent;For on thy fortune I repose myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content: We'll yoke together, like a double shadow To Henry's body, and supply his place; I mean, in bearing weight of government, While he enjoys the honour and his ease. And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor, And all his lands and goods be confiscate.
What else? And that succession be determined.
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
But, with the first of all your chief affairs, Let me entreat, for I command no more, That Margaret your queen and my son Edward Be sent for, to return from France with speed; For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.
Come hither, England's hope.
If secret powers Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts, This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss. His looks are full of peaceful majesty, His head by nature framed to wear a crown, His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself Likely in time to bless a regal throne. Make much of him, my lords, for this is he Must help you more than you are hurt by me.
What news, my friend?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That Edward is escaped from your brother,And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
Unsavoury news! But how made he escape?
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester And the Lord Hastings, who attended him In secret ambush on the forest side And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him; For hunting was his daily exercise.
My brother was too careless of his charge.But let us hence, my sovereign, to provideA salve for any sore that may betide.
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's; For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help, And we shall have more wars before 't be long. As Henry's late presaging prophecy Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond, So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts What may befall him, to his harm and ours: Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst, Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany, Till storms be past of civil enmity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest, Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends, And says that once more I shall interchange My waned state for Henry's regal crown. Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas And brought desired help from Burgundy: What then remains, we being thus arrived From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York, But that we enter, as into our dukedom?
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;For many men that stumble at the thresholdAre well foretold that danger lurks within.
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:By fair or foul means we must enter in,For hither will our friends repair to us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,And shut the gates for safety of ourselves;For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
True, my good lord; I know you for no less.
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,As being well content with that alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] But when the fox hath once got in his nose,He'll soon find means to make the body follow.
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.
Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be open'd.
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
The good old man would fain that all were well,So 'twere not 'long of him; but being enter'd,I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuadeBoth him and all his brothers unto reason.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, master mayor: these gates must not be shutBut in the night or in the time of war.What! Fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
For Edward will defend the town and thee,And all those friends that deign to follow me.
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?
To help King Edward in his time of storm,As every loyal subject ought to do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forgetOur title to the crown and only claimOur dukedom till God please to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:I came to serve a king and not a duke.Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhile, and we'll debateBy what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
What talk you of debating? In few words, If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king, I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone To keep them back that come to succor you: Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim:Till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous wit! Now arms must rule.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,And Henry but usurps the diadem.
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;And now will I be Edward's champion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd:Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king ofEngland and France, and lord of Ireland, & c.
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,By this I challenge him to single fight.
Long live Edward the Fourth!
Thanks, brave Montgomery; and thanks unto you all: If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness. Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York; And when the morning sun shall raise his car Above the border of this horizon, We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates; For well I wot that Henry is no soldier. Ah, froward Clarence! How evil it beseems thee To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother! Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick. Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day, And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia, With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders, Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas, And with his troops doth march amain to London; And many giddy people flock to him.
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.
A little fire is quickly trodden out;Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends, Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war; Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence, Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent, The knights and gentlemen to come with thee: Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham, Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st: And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved, In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends. My sovereign, with the loving citizens, Like to his island girt in with the ocean, Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs, Shall rest in London till we come to him. Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply. Farewell, my sovereign.
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?Methinks the power that Edward hath in fieldShould not be able to encounter mine.
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
That's not my fear; my meed hath got me fame: I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands, Nor posted off their suits with slow delays; My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds, My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs, My mercy dried their water-flowing tears; I have not been desirous of their wealth, Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies. Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd: Then why should they love Edward more than me? No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace: And when the lion fawns upon the lamb, The lamb will never cease to follow him.
Hark, hark, my lord! What shouts are these?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence; And once again proclaim us King of England. You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow: Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry, And swell so much the higher by their ebb. Hence with him to the Tower; let him not speak.
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our courseWhere peremptory Warwick now remains:The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.
Away betimes, before his forces join,And take the great-grown traitor unawares:Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How far off is our brother Montague?Where is the post that came from Montague?
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,And do expect him here some two hours hence.
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies:The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
Who should that be? Belike, unlook'd-for friends.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O unbid spite! Is sportful Edward come?Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,That we could hear no news of his repair?
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates, Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee, Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy? And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence, Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own, Call Warwick patron and be penitent? And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
I thought, at least, he would have said the king;Or did he make the jest against his will?
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:I'll do thee service for so good a gift.
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:What is the body when the head is off?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast, But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten, The king was slily finger'd from the deck! You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace, And, ten to one, you'll meet him in the Tower.
'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down:Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,And with the other fling it at thy face,Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend, This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off, Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood, 'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O cheerful colours! See where Oxford comes!
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!
The gates are open, let us enter too.
So other foes may set upon our backs.Stand we in good array; for they no doubtWill issue out again and bid us battle:If not, the city being but of small defence,We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
O, welcome, Oxford! For we want thy help.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treasonEven with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
The harder match'd, the greater victory:My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,Have sold their lives unto the house of York;And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,Of force enough to bid his brother battle;With whom an upright zeal to right prevailsMore than the nature of a brother's love!Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee I will not ruinate my father's house, Who gave his blood to lime the stones together, And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick, That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural, To bend the fatal instruments of war Against his brother and his lawful king? Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath: To keep that oath were more impiety Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter. I am so sorry for my trespass made That, to deserve well at my brother's hands, I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe, With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee— As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad— To plague thee for thy foul misleading me. And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee, And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks. Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends: And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults, For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brotherlike.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!I will away towards Barnet presently,And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear;For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, who is nigh? Come to me, friend or foe, And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick? Why ask I that? My mangled body shows, My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows, That I must yield my body to the earth And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe. Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge, Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle, Under whose shade the ramping lion slept, Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind. These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil, Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun, To search the secret treasons of the world: The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood, Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres; For who lived king, but I could dig his grave? And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow? Lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood! My parks, my walks, my manors that I had Even now forsake me, and of all my lands Is nothing left me but my body's length. Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust? And, live we how we can, yet die we must.
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! Wert thou as we are. We might recover all our loss again; The queen from France hath brought a puissant power: Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly!
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague, If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand. And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile! Thou lovest me not; for, brother, if thou didst, Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood That glues my lips and will not let me speak. Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last; And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick, And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.' And more he would have said, and more he spoke, Which sounded like a clamour in a vault, That mought not be distinguished; but at last I well might hear, delivered with a groan, 'O, farewell, Warwick!'
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves;For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course, And we are graced with wreaths of victory. But, in the midst of this bright-shining day, I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud, That will encounter with our glorious sun, Ere he attain his easeful western bed: I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud And blow it to the source from whence it came: The very beams will dry those vapours up, For every cloud engenders not a storm.
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong, And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her: If she have time to breathe be well assured Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertised by our loving friends That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury: We, having now the best at Barnet field, Will thither straight, for willingness rids way; And, as we march, our strength will be augmented In every county as we go along. Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss, But cheerly seek how to redress their harms. What though the mast be now blown overboard, The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost, And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood? Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad With tearful eyes add water to the sea And give more strength to that which hath too much, Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock, Which industry and courage might have saved? Ah, what a shame! Ah, what a fault were this! Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that? And Montague our topmast; what of him? Our slaughter'd friends the tackles; what of these? Why, is not Oxford here another anchor? And Somerset another goodly mast? The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings? And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge? We will not from the helm to sit and weep, But keep our course, though the rough wind say no, From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck, As good to chide the waves as speak them fair. And what is Edward but ruthless sea? What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit? And Richard but a ragged fatal rock? All these the enemies to our poor bark. Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while! Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink: Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off, Or else you famish; that's a threefold death. This speak I, lords, to let you understand, If case some one of you would fly from us, That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks. Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided 'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit Should, if a coward heard her speak these words, Infuse his breast with magnanimity And make him, naked, foil a man at arms. I speak not this as doubting any here For did I but suspect a fearful man He should have leave to go away betimes, Lest in our need he might infect another And make him of like spirit to himself. If any such be here—as God forbid!— Let him depart before we need his help.
Women and children of so high a courage, And warriors faint! Why, 'twere perpetual shame. O brave young prince! Thy famous grandfather Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live To bear his image and renew his glories!
And he that will not fight for such a hope.Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.
Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.
I thought no less: it is his policyTo haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.
But he's deceived; we are in readiness.
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood, Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength, Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night. I need not add more fuel to your fire, For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say My tears gainsay; for every word I speak, Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes. Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign, Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd, His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain, His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent; And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil. You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords, Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:For Somerset, off with his guilty head.Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
So part we sadly in this troublous world,To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
Is proclamation made, that who finds EdwardShall have a high reward, and he his life?
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak. What! Can so young a thorn begin to prick? Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects, And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York! Suppose that I am now my father's mouth; Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou, Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee, Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
That you might still have worn the petticoat,And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.
Let Aesop fable in a winter's night;His currish riddles sort not with this place.
By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know my duty; you are all undutiful: Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George, And thou misshapen Dick, I tell ye all I am your better, traitors as ye are: And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.
Sprawl'st thou? Take that, to end thy agony.
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
O, kill me too!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, and shall.
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?
What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother;I'll hence to London on a serious matter:Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What? What?
The Tower, the Tower.
O Ned, sweet Ned! Speak to thy mother, boy! Canst thou not speak? O traitors! Murderers! They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all, Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame, If this foul deed were by to equal it: He was a man; this, in respect, a child: And men ne'er spend their fury on a child. What's worse than murderer, that I may name it? No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak: And I will speak, that so my heart may burst. Butchers and villains! Bloody cannibals! How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd! You have no children, butchers! If you had, The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse: But if you ever chance to have a child, Look in his youth to have him so cut off As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:What, wilt thou not? Then, Clarence, do it thou.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself: 'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity. What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher, Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou? Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed; Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.
Away, I say; I charge ye, bear her hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!
Where's Richard gone?
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
He's sudden if a thing comes in his head. Now march we hence: discharge the common sort With pay and thanks, and let's away to London And see our gentle queen how well she fares: By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lord:—my lord, I should say rather;'Tis sin to flatter; 'good' was little better:'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleeceAnd next his throat unto the butcher's knife.What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,Have now the fatal object in my eyeWhere my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,That taught his son the office of a fowl!An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boyThy brother Edward, and thyself the seaWhose envious gulf did swallow up his life.Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!My breast can better brook thy dagger's pointThan can my ears that tragic history.But wherefore dost thou come? Is't for my life?
Think'st thou I am an executioner?
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:If murdering innocents be executing,Why, then thou art an executioner.
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume, Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine. And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand, Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear, And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's, And many an orphan's water-standing eye— Men for their sons, wives for their husbands, And orphans for their parents timeless death— Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born. The owl shriek'd at thy birth,—an evil sign; The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time; Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees; The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top, And chattering pies in dismal discords sung. Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain, And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope, To wit, an indigested and deformed lump, Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree. Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born, To signify thou camest to bite the world: And, if the rest be true which I have heard, Thou camest—
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted. See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death! O, may such purple tears be alway shed From those that wish the downfall of our house! If any spark of life be yet remaining, Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither:
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear. Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of; For I have often heard my mother say I came into the world with my legs forward: Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste, And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right? The midwife wonder'd and the women cried 'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!' And so I was; which plainly signified That I should snarl and bite and play the dog. Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it. I have no brother, I am like no brother; And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine, Be resident in men like one another And not in me: I am myself alone. Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light: But I will sort a pitchy day for thee; For I will buz abroad such prophecies That Edward shall be fearful of his life, And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death. King Henry and the prince his son are gone: Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest, Counting myself but bad till I be best. I'll throw thy body in another room And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
Once more we sit in England's royal throne, Re-purchased with the blood of enemies. What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn, Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride! Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd For hardy and undoubted champions; Two Cliffords, as the father and the son, And two Northumberlands; two braver men Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound; With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague, That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion And made the forest tremble when they roar'd. Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat And made our footstool of security. Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy. Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night, Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat, That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace; And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
[Aside] I'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid; For yet I am not look'd on in the world. This shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave; And heave it shall some weight, or break my back: Work thou the way,—and thou shalt execute.
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
The duty that I owe unto your majestyI seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.
[Aside] And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit. To say the truth, so Judas kissed his masterAnd cried 'all hail!' when as he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
What will your grace have done with Margaret?Reignier, her father, to the king of FranceHath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waft her hence to France. And now what rests but that we spend the time With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows, Such as befits the pleasure of the court? Sound drums and trumpets! Farewell sour annoy! For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I come no more to make you laugh: things now, That bear a weighty and a serious brow, Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe, Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow, We now present. Those that can pity, here May, if they think it well, let fall a tear; The subject will deserve it. Such as give Their money out of hope they may believe, May here find truth too. Those that come to see Only a show or two, and so agree The play may pass, if they be still and willing, I'll undertake may see away their shilling Richly in two short hours. Only they That come to hear a merry bawdy play, A noise of targets, or to see a fellow In a long motley coat guarded with yellow, Will be deceived; for, gentle hearers, know, To rank our chosen truth with such a show As fool and fight is, beside forfeiting Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring, To make that only true we now intend, Will leave us never an understanding friend. Therefore, for goodness' sake, and as you are known The first and happiest hearers of the town, Be sad, as we would make ye: think ye see The very persons of our noble story As they were living; think you see them great, And follow'd with the general throng and sweat Of thousand friends; then in a moment, see How soon this mightiness meets misery: And, if you can be merry then, I'll say A man may weep upon his wedding-day.
Good morrow, and well met. How have ye doneSince last we saw in France?
I thank your grace,Healthful; and ever since a fresh admirerOf what I saw there.
An untimely ague Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when Those suns of glory, those two lights of men, Met in the vale of Andren.
'Twixt Guynes and Arde: I was then present, saw them salute on horseback; Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung In their embracement, as they grew together; Which had they, what four throned ones could have weigh'd Such a compounded one?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All the whole timeI was my chamber's prisoner.
Then you lost The view of earthly glory: men might say, Till this time pomp was single, but now married To one above itself. Each following day Became the next day's master, till the last Made former wonders its. To-day the French, All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods, Shone down the English; and, to-morrow, they Made Britain India: every man that stood Show'd like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were As cherubins, all guilt: the madams too, Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear The pride upon them, that their very labour Was to them as a painting: now this masque Was cried incomparable; and the ensuing night Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings, Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst, As presence did present them; him in eye, Still him in praise: and, being present both 'Twas said they saw but one; and no discerner Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns— For so they phrase 'em—by their heralds challenged The noble spirits to arms, they did perform Beyond thought's compass; that former fabulous story, Being now seen possible enough, got credit, That Bevis was believed.
O, you go far.
As I belong to worship and affect In honour honesty, the tract of every thing Would by a good discourser lose some life, Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal; To the disposing of it nought rebell'd. Order gave each thing view; the office did Distinctly his full function.
Who did guide,I mean, who set the body and the limbsOf this great sport together, as you guess?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One, certes, that promises no elementIn such a business.
I pray you, who, my lord?
All this was order'd by the good discretionOf the right reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him! no man's pie is freed From his ambitious finger. What had he To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder That such a keech can with his very bulk Take up the rays o' the beneficial sun And keep it from the earth.
Surely, sir, There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends; For, being not propp'd by ancestry, whose grace Chalks successors their way, nor call'd upon For high feats done to the crown; neither allied For eminent assistants; but, spider-like, Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note, The force of his own merit makes his way A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys A place next to the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot tell What heaven hath given him,—let some graver eye Pierce into that; but I can see his pride Peep through each part of him: whence has he that, If not from hell? the devil is a niggard, Or has given all before, and he begins A new hell in himself.
Why the devil, Upon this French going out, took he upon him, Without the privity o' the king, to appoint Who should attend on him? He makes up the file Of all the gentry; for the most part such To whom as great a charge as little honour He meant to lay upon: and his own letter, The honourable board of council out, Must fetch him in the papers.
I do know Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have By this so sickened their estates, that never They shall abound as formerly.
O, many Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em For this great journey. What did this vanity But minister communication of A most poor issue?
Grievingly I think,The peace between the French and us not valuesThe cost that did conclude it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Every man, After the hideous storm that follow'd, was A thing inspired; and, not consulting, broke Into a general prophecy; That this tempest, Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded The sudden breach on't.
Which is budded out;For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'dOur merchants' goods at Bourdeaux.
Is it thereforeThe ambassador is silenced?
Marry, is't.
A proper title of a peace; and purchasedAt a superfluous rate!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, all this businessOur reverend cardinal carried.
Like it your grace, The state takes notice of the private difference Betwixt you and the cardinal. I advise you— And take it from a heart that wishes towards you Honour and plenteous safety—that you read The cardinal's malice and his potency Together; to consider further that What his high hatred would effect wants not A minister in his power. You know his nature, That he's revengeful, and I know his sword Hath a sharp edge: it's long and, 't may be said, It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend, Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel, You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock That I advise your shunning.
The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor, ha?Where's his examination?
Here, so please you.
Is he in person ready?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, please your grace.
Well, we shall then know more; and BuckinghamShall lessen this big look.
This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and I Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's book Outworths a noble's blood.
What, are you chafed?Ask God for temperance; that's the appliance onlyWhich your disease requires.
I read in's looks Matter against me; and his eye reviled Me, as his abject object: at this instant He bores me with some trick: he's gone to the king; I'll follow and outstare him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, my lord, And let your reason with your choler question What 'tis you go about: to climb steep hills Requires slow pace at first: anger is like A full-hot horse, who being allow'd his way, Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England Can advise me like you: be to yourself As you would to your friend.
I'll to the king; And from a mouth of honour quite cry down This Ipswich fellow's insolence; or proclaim There's difference in no persons.
Be advised; Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot That it do singe yourself: we may outrun, By violent swiftness, that which we run at, And lose by over-running. Know you not, The fire that mounts the liquor til run o'er, In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advised: I say again, there is no English soul More stronger to direct you than yourself, If with the sap of reason you would quench, Or but allay, the fire of passion.
Sir, I am thankful to you; and I'll go along By your prescription: but this top-proud fellow, Whom from the flow of gall I name not but From sincere motions, by intelligence, And proofs as clear as founts in July when We see each grain of gravel, I do know To be corrupt and treasonous.
Say not 'treasonous.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To the king I'll say't; and make my vouch as strong As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox, Or wolf, or both,— for he is equal ravenous As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief As able to perform't; his mind and place Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally— Only to show his pomp as well in France As here at home, suggests the king our master To this last costly treaty, the interview, That swallow'd so much treasure, and like a glass Did break i' the rinsing.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray, give me favour, sir. This cunning cardinal The articles o' the combination drew As himself pleased; and they were ratified As he cried 'Thus let be': to as much end As give a crutch to the dead: but our count-cardinal Has done this, and 'tis well; for worthy Wolsey, Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows,— Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy To the old dam, treason,—Charles the emperor, Under pretence to see the queen his aunt— For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came To whisper Wolsey,—here makes visitation: His fears were, that the interview betwixt England and France might, through their amity, Breed him some prejudice; for from this league Peep'd harms that menaced him: he privily Deals with our cardinal; and, as I trow,— Which I do well; for I am sure the emperor Paid ere he promised; whereby his suit was granted Ere it was ask'd; but when the way was made, And paved with gold, the emperor thus desired, That he would please to alter the king's course, And break the foresaid peace. Let the king know, As soon he shall by me, that thus the cardinal Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases, And for his own advantage.
I am sorryTo hear this of him; and could wish he wereSomething mistaken in't.
No, not a syllable:I do pronounce him in that very shapeHe shall appear in proof.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your office, sergeant; execute it.
Sir, My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I Arrest thee of high treason, in the name Of our most sovereign king.
Lo, you, my lord,The net has fall'n upon me! I shall perishUnder device and practise.
I am sorry To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on The business present: 'tis his highness' pleasure You shall to the Tower.
It will help me nothing To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me Which makes my whitest part black. The will of heaven Be done in this and all things! I obey. O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, he must bear you company. [To ABERGAVENNY] The king is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you knowHow he determines further.
As the duke said,The will of heaven be done, and the king's pleasureBy me obey'd!
Here is a warrant from The king to attach Lord Montacute; and the bodies Of the duke's confessor, John de la Car, One Gilbert Perk, his chancellor—
So, so;These are the limbs o' the plot: no more, I hope.
A monk o' the Chartreux.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, Nicholas Hopkins?
He.
My surveyor is false; the o'er-great cardinal Hath show'd him gold; my life is spann'd already: I am the shadow of poor Buckingham, Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on, By darkening my clear sun. My lord, farewell.
My life itself, and the best heart of it, Thanks you for this great care: I stood i' the level Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks To you that choked it. Let be call'd before us That gentleman of Buckingham's; in person I'll hear him his confessions justify; And point by point the treasons of his master He shall again relate.
Nay, we must longer kneel: I am a suitor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Arise, and take place by us: half your suit Never name to us; you have half our power: The other moiety, ere you ask, is given; Repeat your will and take it.
Thank your majesty. That you would love yourself, and in that love Not unconsider'd leave your honour, nor The dignity of your office, is the point Of my petition.
Lady mine, proceed.
I am solicited, not by a few, And those of true condition, that your subjects Are in great grievance: there have been commissions Sent down among 'em, which hath flaw'd the heart Of all their loyalties: wherein, although, My good lord cardinal, they vent reproaches Most bitterly on you, as putter on Of these exactions, yet the king our master— Whose honour heaven shield from soil!—even he escapes not Language unmannerly, yea, such which breaks The sides of loyalty, and almost appears In loud rebellion.
Not almost appears, It doth appear; for, upon these taxations, The clothiers all, not able to maintain The many to them longing, have put off The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who, Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunger And lack of other means, in desperate manner Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar, And danger serves among then!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Taxation! Wherein? and what taxation? My lord cardinal, You that are blamed for it alike with us, Know you of this taxation?
Please you, sir, I know but of a single part, in aught Pertains to the state; and front but in that file Where others tell steps with me.
No, my lord, You know no more than others; but you frame Things that are known alike; which are not wholesome To those which would not know them, and yet must Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions, Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are Most pestilent to the bearing; and, to bear 'em, The back is sacrifice to the load. They say They are devised by you; or else you suffer Too hard an exclamation.
Still exaction!The nature of it? in what kind, let's know,Is this exaction?
I am much too venturous In tempting of your patience; but am bolden'd Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief Comes through commissions, which compel from each The sixth part of his substance, to be levied Without delay; and the pretence for this Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths: Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze Allegiance in them; their curses now Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass, This tractable obedience is a slave To each incensed will. I would your highness Would give it quick consideration, for There is no primer business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By my life,This is against our pleasure.
And for me, I have no further gone in this than by A single voice; and that not pass'd me but By learned approbation of the judges. If I am Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know My faculties nor person, yet will be The chronicles of my doing, let me say 'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake That virtue must go through. We must not stint Our necessary actions, in the fear To cope malicious censurers; which ever, As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further Than vainly longing. What we oft do best, By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is Not ours, or not allow'd; what worst, as oft, Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up For our best act. If we shall stand still, In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at, We should take root here where we sit, or sit State-statues only.
Things done well, And with a care, exempt themselves from fear; Things done without example, in their issue Are to be fear'd. Have you a precedent Of this commission? I believe, not any. We must not rend our subjects from our laws, And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each? A trembling contribution! Why, we take From every tree lop, bark, and part o' the timber; And, though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd, The air will drink the sap. To every county Where this is question'd send our letters, with Free pardon to each man that has denied The force of this commission: pray, look to't; I put it to your care.
A word with you. [To the Secretary] Let there be letters writ to every shire, Of the king's grace and pardon. The grieved commons Hardly conceive of me; let it be noised That through our intercession this revokement And pardon comes: I shall anon advise you Further in the proceeding.
I am sorry that the Duke of BuckinghamIs run in your displeasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It grieves many: The gentleman is learn'd, and a most rare speaker; To nature none more bound; his training such, That he may furnish and instruct great teachers, And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see, When these so noble benefits shall prove Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt, They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly Than ever they were fair. This man so complete, Who was enroll'd 'mongst wonders, and when we, Almost with ravish'd listening, could not find His hour of speech a minute; he, my lady, Hath into monstrous habits put the graces That once were his, and is become as black As if besmear'd in hell. Sit by us; you shall hear— This was his gentleman in trust—of him Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount The fore-recited practises; whereof We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,Most like a careful subject, have collectedOut of the Duke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual with him, every day It would infect his speech, that if the king Should without issue die, he'll carry it so To make the sceptre his: these very words I've heard him utter to his son-in-law, Lord Abergavenny; to whom by oath he menaced Revenge upon the cardinal.
Please your highness, note This dangerous conception in this point. Not friended by his wish, to your high person His will is most malignant; and it stretches Beyond you, to your friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My learn'd lord cardinal,Deliver all with charity.
Speak on: How grounded he his title to the crown, Upon our fail? to this point hast thou heard him At any time speak aught?
He was brought to thisBy a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins.
What was that Hopkins?
Sir, a Chartreux friar,His confessor, who fed him every minuteWith words of sovereignty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How know'st thou this?
Not long before your highness sped to France, The duke being at the Rose, within the parish Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand What was the speech among the Londoners Concerning the French journey: I replied, Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious, To the king's danger. Presently the duke Said, 'twas the fear, indeed; and that he doubted 'Twould prove the verity of certain words Spoke by a holy monk; 'that oft,' says he, 'Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour To hear from him a matter of some moment: Whom after under the confession's seal He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke My chaplain to no creature living, but To me, should utter, with demure confidence This pausingly ensued: neither the king nor's heirs, Tell you the duke, shall prosper: bid him strive To gain the love o' the commonalty: the duke Shall govern England.'
If I know you well, You were the duke's surveyor, and lost your office On the complaint o' the tenants: take good heed You charge not in your spleen a noble person And spoil your nobler soul: I say, take heed; Yes, heartily beseech you.
Let him on.Go forward.
On my soul, I'll speak but truth. I told my lord the duke, by the devil's illusions The monk might be deceived; and that 'twas dangerous for him To ruminate on this so far, until It forged him some design, which, being believed, It was much like to do: he answer'd, 'Tush, It can do me no damage;' adding further, That, had the king in his last sickness fail'd, The cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads Should have gone off.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!There's mischief in this man: canst thou say further?
I can, my liege.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich,After your highness had reproved the dukeAbout Sir William Blomer,—
I rememberOf such a time: being my sworn servant,The duke retain'd him his. But on; what hence?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'If,' quoth he, 'I for this had been committed, As, to the Tower, I thought, I would have play'd The part my father meant to act upon The usurper Richard; who, being at Salisbury, Made suit to come in's presence; which if granted, As he made semblance of his duty, would Have put his knife to him.'
A giant traitor!
Now, madam, may his highness live in freedom,and this man out of prison?
God mend all!
There's something more would out of thee; what say'st?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]After 'the duke his father,' with 'the knife,' He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger, Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes He did discharge a horrible oath; whose tenor Was,—were he evil used, he would outgo His father by as much as a performance Does an irresolute purpose.
There's his period, To sheathe his knife in us. He is attach'd; Call him to present trial: if he may Find mercy in the law, 'tis his: if none, Let him not seek 't of us: by day and night, He's traitor to the height.
Is't possible the spells of France should juggleMen into such strange mysteries?
New customs,Though they be never so ridiculous,Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.
As far as I see, all the good our English Have got by the late voyage is but merely A fit or two o' the face; but they are shrewd ones; For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly Their very noses had been counsellors To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They have all new legs, and lame ones: one would take it,That never saw 'em pace before, the spavinOr springhalt reign'd among 'em.
Death! my lord,Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too,That, sure, they've worn out Christendom.
How now!What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?
Faith, my lord,I hear of none, but the new proclamationThat's clapp'd upon the court-gate.
What is't for?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The reformation of our travell'd gallants,That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.
I'm glad 'tis there: now I would pray our monsieursTo think an English courtier may be wise,And never see the Louvre.
They must either, For so run the conditions, leave those remnants Of fool and feather that they got in France, With all their honourable point of ignorance Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks, Abusing better men than they can be, Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings, Short blister'd breeches, and those types of travel, And understand again like honest men; Or pack to their old playfellows: there, I take it, They may, 'cum privilegio,' wear away The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.
'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseasesAre grown so catching.
What a loss our ladiesWill have of these trim vanities!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, marry, There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies; A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.
The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going, For, sure, there's no converting of 'em: now An honest country lord, as I am, beaten A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong And have an hour of hearing; and, by'r lady, Held current music too.
Well said, Lord Sands;Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.
No, my lord;Nor shall not, while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas,Whither were you a-going?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To the cardinal's:Your lordship is a guest too.
O, 'tis true: This night he makes a supper, and a great one, To many lords and ladies; there will be The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;His dews fall every where.
No doubt he's noble;He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may, my lord; has wherewithal: in him Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine: Men of his way should be most liberal; They are set here for examples.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True, they are so: But few now give so great ones. My barge stays; Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas, We shall be late else; which I would not be, For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford This night to be comptrollers.
I am your lordship's.
Ladies, a general welcome from his grace Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates To fair content and you: none here, he hopes, In all this noble bevy, has brought with her One care abroad; he would have all as merry As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome, Can make good people. O, my lord, you're tardy:
The very thought of this fair companyClapp'd wings to me.
You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Thomas Lovell, had the cardinal But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these Should find a running banquet ere they rested, I think would better please 'em: by my life, They are a sweet society of fair ones.
O, that your lordship were but now confessorTo one or two of these!
I would I were;They should find easy penance.
Faith, how easy?
As easy as a down-bed would afford it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry, Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this: His grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze; Two women placed together makes cold weather: My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking; Pray, sit between these ladies.
By my faith, And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies: If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me; I had it from my father.
Was he mad, sir?
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too:But he would bite none; just as I do now,He would kiss you twenty with a breath.
Well said, my lord. So, now you're fairly seated. Gentlemen, The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies Pass away frowning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For my little cure,Let me alone.
You're welcome, my fair guests: that noble lady, Or gentleman, that is not freely merry, Is not my friend: this, to confirm my welcome; And to you all, good health.
Your grace is noble:Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks,And save me so much talking.
My Lord Sands, I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours. Ladies, you are not merry: gentlemen, Whose fault is this?
The red wine first must riseIn their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'emTalk us to silence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are a merry gamester,My Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play.Here's to your ladyship: and pledge it, madam,For 'tis to such a thing,—
You cannot show me.
I told your grace they would talk anon.
What's that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look out there, some of ye.
What warlike voice,And to what end is this? Nay, ladies, fear not;By all the laws of war you're privileged.
How now! what is't?
A noble troop of strangers; For so they seem: they've left their barge and landed; And hither make, as great ambassadors From foreign princes.
Good lord chamberlain, Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue; And, pray, receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have now a broken banquet; but we'll mend it.A good digestion to you all: and once moreI shower a welcome on ye; welcome all.
A noble company! what are their pleasures?
Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd To tell your grace, that, having heard by fame Of this so noble and so fair assembly This night to meet here, they could do no less Out of the great respect they bear to beauty, But leave their flocks; and, under your fair conduct, Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat An hour of revels with 'em.
Say, lord chamberlain,They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay 'emA thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.
The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty,Till now I never knew thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord!
Your grace?
Pray, tell 'em thus much from me: There should be one amongst 'em, by his person, More worthy this place than myself; to whom, If I but knew him, with my love and duty I would surrender it.
I will, my lord.
What say they?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such a one, they all confess,There is indeed; which they would have your graceFind out, and he will take it.
Let me see, then.By all your good leaves, gentlemen; here I'll makeMy royal choice.
Ye have found him, cardinal:
You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord:You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, cardinal,I should judge now unhappily.
I am gladYour grace is grown so pleasant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord chamberlain,Prithee, come hither: what fair lady's that?
An't please your grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter—The Viscount Rochford,—one of her highness' women.
By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweetheart, I were unmannerly, to take you out, And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen! Let it go round.
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet readyI' the privy chamber?
Yes, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your grace,I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
I fear, too much.
There's fresher air, my lord,In the next chamber.
Lead in your ladies, every one: sweet partner, I must not yet forsake you: let's be merry: Good my lord cardinal, I have half a dozen healths To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it.
Whither away so fast?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, God save ye!Even to the hall, to hear what shall becomeOf the great Duke of Buckingham.
I'll save youThat labour, sir. All's now done, but the ceremonyOf bringing back the prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes, indeed, was I.
Pray, speak what has happen'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may guess quickly what.
Is he found guilty?
Yes, truly is he, and condemn'd upon't.
I am sorry for't.
So are a number more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, pray, how pass'd it?
I'll tell you in a little. The great duke Came to the bar; where to his accusations He pleaded still not guilty and alleged Many sharp reasons to defeat the law. The king's attorney on the contrary Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions Of divers witnesses; which the duke desired To have brought viva voce to his face: At which appear'd against him his surveyor; Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor; and John Car, Confessor to him; with that devil-monk, Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That was heThat fed him with his prophecies?
The same. All these accused him strongly; which he fain Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not: And so his peers, upon this evidence, Have found him guilty of high treason. Much He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When he was brought again to the bar, to hear His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd With such an agony, he sweat extremely, And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty: But he fell to himself again, and sweetly In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.
I do not think he fears death.
Sure, he does not:He never was so womanish; the causeHe may a little grieve at.
CertainlyThe cardinal is the end of this.
'Tis likely, By all conjectures: first, Kildare's attainder, Then deputy of Ireland; who removed, Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too, Lest he should help his father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That trick of stateWas a deep envious one.
At his return No doubt he will requite it. This is noted, And generally, whoever the king favours, The cardinal instantly will find employment, And far enough from court too.
All the commons Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience, Wish him ten fathom deep: this duke as much They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham, The mirror of all courtesy;—
Stay there, sir,And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.
Let's stand close, and behold him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All good people, You that thus far have come to pity me, Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me. I have this day received a traitor's judgment, And by that name must die: yet, heaven bear witness, And if I have a conscience, let it sink me, Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful! The law I bear no malice for my death; 'T has done, upon the premises, but justice: But those that sought it I could wish more Christians: Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em: Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief, Nor build their evils on the graves of great men; For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em. For further life in this world I ne'er hope, Nor will I sue, although the king have mercies More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me, And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham, His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave Is only bitter to him, only dying, Go with me, like good angels, to my end; And, as the long divorce of steel falls on me, Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice, And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, o' God's name.
I do beseech your grace, for charity,If ever any malice in your heartWere hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you As I would be forgiven: I forgive all; There cannot be those numberless offences 'Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with: no black envy Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his grace; And if he speak of Buckingham, pray, tell him You met him half in heaven: my vows and prayers Yet are the king's; and, till my soul forsake, Shall cry for blessings on him: may he live Longer than I have time to tell his years! Ever beloved and loving may his rule be! And when old time shall lead him to his end, Goodness and he fill up one monument!
To the water side I must conduct your grace;Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,Who undertakes you to your end.
Prepare there, The duke is coming: see the barge be ready; And fit it with such furniture as suits The greatness of his person.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, Sir Nicholas, Let it alone; my state now will but mock me. When I came hither, I was lord high constable And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun: Yet I am richer than my base accusers, That never knew what truth meant: I now seal it; And with that blood will make 'em one day groan for't. My noble father, Henry of Buckingham, Who first raised head against usurping Richard, Flying for succor to his servant Banister, Being distress'd, was by that wretch betray'd, And without trial fell; God's peace be with him! Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying My father's loss, like a most royal prince, Restored me to my honours, and, out of ruins, Made my name once more noble. Now his son, Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name and all That made me happy at one stroke has taken For ever from the world. I had my trial, And, must needs say, a noble one; which makes me, A little happier than my wretched father: Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most; A most unnatural and faithless service! Heaven has an end in all: yet, you that hear me, This from a dying man receive as certain: Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends And give your hearts to, when they once perceive The least rub in your fortunes, fall away Like water from ye, never found again But where they mean to sink ye. All good people, Pray for me! I must now forsake ye: the last hour Of my long weary life is come upon me. Farewell: And when you would say something that is sad, Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me!
O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,I fear, too many curses on their headsThat were the authors.
If the duke be guiltless, 'Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling Of an ensuing evil, if it fall, Greater than this.
Good angels keep it from us!What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
This secret is so weighty, 'twill requireA strong faith to conceal it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me have it;I do not talk much.
I am confident, You shall, sir: did you not of late days hear A buzzing of a separation Between the king and Katharine?
Yes, but it held not: For when the king once heard it, out of anger He sent command to the lord mayor straight To stop the rumor, and allay those tongues That durst disperse it.
But that slander, sir, Is found a truth now: for it grows again Fresher than e'er it was; and held for certain The king will venture at it. Either the cardinal, Or some about him near, have, out of malice To the good queen, possess'd him with a scruple That will undo her: to confirm this too, Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately; As all think, for this business.
'Tis the cardinal; And merely to revenge him on the emperor For not bestowing on him, at his asking, The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think you have hit the mark: but is't not cruelThat she should feel the smart of this? The cardinalWill have his will, and she must fall.
'Tis woful.We are too open here to argue this;Let's think in private more.
'My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north. When they were ready to set out for London, a man of my lord cardinal's, by commission and main power, took 'em from me; with this reason: His master would be served before a subject, if not before the king; which stopped our mouths, sir.' I fear he will indeed: well, let him have them: He will have all, I think.
Well met, my lord chamberlain.
Good day to both your graces.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How is the king employ'd?
I left him private,Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
What's the cause?
It seems the marriage with his brother's wifeHas crept too near his conscience.
No, his conscienceHas crept too near another lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis so: This is the cardinal's doing, the king-cardinal: That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune, Turns what he list. The king will know him one day.
Pray God he do! he'll never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business! And with what zeal! for, now he has crack'd the league Between us and the emperor, the queen's great nephew, He dives into the king's soul, and there scatters Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience, Fears, and despairs; and all these for his marriage: And out of all these to restore the king, He counsels a divorce; a loss of her That, like a jewel, has hung twenty years About his neck, yet never lost her lustre; Of her that loves him with that excellence That angels love good men with; even of her That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls, Will bless the king: and is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true These news are every where; every tongue speaks 'em, And every true heart weeps for't: all that dare Look into these affairs see this main end, The French king's sister. Heaven will one day open The king's eyes, that so long have slept upon This bold bad man.
And free us from his slavery.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We had need pray, And heartily, for our deliverance; Or this imperious man will work us all From princes into pages: all men's honours Lie like one lump before him, to be fashion'd Into what pitch he please.
For me, my lords, I love him not, nor fear him; there's my creed: As I am made without him, so I'll stand, If the king please; his curses and his blessings Touch me alike, they're breath I not believe in. I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him To him that made him proud, the pope.
Let's in; And with some other business put the king From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him: My lord, you'll bear us company?
Excuse me; The king has sent me otherwhere: besides, You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him: Health to your lordships.
Thanks, my good lord chamberlain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How sad he looks! sure, he is much afflicted.
Who's there, ha?
Pray God he be not angry.
Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselvesInto my private meditations?Who am I? ha?
A gracious king that pardons all offences Malice ne'er meant: our breach of duty this way Is business of estate; in which we come To know your royal pleasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ye are too bold:Go to; I'll make ye know your times of business:Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?
Who's there? my good lord cardinal? O my Wolsey,The quiet of my wounded conscience;Thou art a cure fit for a king. [To CARDINAL CAMPEIUS] You're welcome,Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom:Use us and it. [TO CARDINAL WOLSEY] My good lord, have great careI be not found a talker.
Sir, you cannot.I would your grace would give us but an hourOf private conference.
[To NORFOLK and SUFFOLK] We are busy; go.
[Aside to SUFFOLK] This priest has no pride in him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to NORFOLK] Not to speak of:I would not be so sick though for his place:But this cannot continue.
[Aside to SUFFOLK] If it do,I'll venture one have-at-him.
[Aside to NORFOLK] I another.
Your grace has given a precedent of wisdom Above all princes, in committing freely Your scruple to the voice of Christendom: Who can be angry now? what envy reach you? The Spaniard, tied blood and favour to her, Must now confess, if they have any goodness, The trial just and noble. All the clerks, I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms Have their free voices: Rome, the nurse of judgment, Invited by your noble self, hath sent One general tongue unto us, this good man, This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius; Whom once more I present unto your highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,And thank the holy conclave for their loves:They have sent me such a man I would have wish'd for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves, You are so noble. To your highness' hand I tender my commission; by whose virtue, The court of Rome commanding, you, my lord Cardinal of York, are join'd with me their servant In the unpartial judging of this business.
Two equal men. The queen shall be acquaintedForthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?
I know your majesty has always loved her So dear in heart, not to deny her that A woman of less place might ask by law: Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her.
Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour To him that does best: God forbid else. Cardinal, Prithee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary: I find him a fit fellow.
[Aside to GARDINER] Give me your hand much joy andfavour to you;You are the king's now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to CARDINAL WOLSEY] But to be commandedFor ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me.
Come hither, Gardiner.
My Lord of York, was not one Doctor PaceIn this man's place before him?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learned man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, surely.
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread thenEven of yourself, lord cardinal.
How! of me?
They will not stick to say you envied him, And fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous, Kept him a foreign man still; which so grieved him, That he ran mad and died.
Heaven's peace be with him! That's Christian care enough: for living murmurers There's places of rebuke. He was a fool; For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow, If I command him, follows my appointment: I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother, We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Deliver this with modesty to the queen.
The most convenient place that I can think of For such receipt of learning is Black-Friars; There ye shall meet about this weighty business. My Wolsey, see it furnish'd. O, my lord, Would it not grieve an able man to leave So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience! O, 'tis a tender place; and I must leave her.
Not for that neither: here's the pang that pinches: His highness having lived so long with her, and she So good a lady that no tongue could ever Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life, She never knew harm-doing: O, now, after So many courses of the sun enthroned, Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than 'Tis sweet at first to acquire,—after this process, To give her the avaunt! it is a pity Would move a monster.
Hearts of most hard temperMelt and lament for her.
O, God's will! much better She ne'er had known pomp: though't be temporal, Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging As soul and body's severing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, poor lady!She's a stranger now again.
So much the more Must pity drop upon her. Verily, I swear, 'tis better to be lowly born, And range with humble livers in content, Than to be perk'd up in a glistering grief, And wear a golden sorrow.
Our contentIs our best having.
By my troth and maidenhead,I would not be a queen.
Beshrew me, I would, And venture maidenhead for't; and so would you, For all this spice of your hypocrisy: You, that have so fair parts of woman on you, Have too a woman's heart; which ever yet Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty; Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts, Saving your mincing, the capacity Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive, If you might please to stretch it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, good troth.
Yes, troth, and troth; you would not be a queen?
No, not for all the riches under heaven.
'Tis strange: a three-pence bow'd would hire me, Old as I am, to queen it: but, I pray you, What think you of a duchess? have you limbs To bear that load of title?
No, in truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then you are weakly made: pluck off a little; I would not be a young count in your way, For more than blushing comes to: if your back Cannot vouchsafe this burthen,'tis too weak Ever to get a boy.
How you do talk!I swear again, I would not be a queenFor all the world.
In faith, for little England You'ld venture an emballing: I myself Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd No more to the crown but that. Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow, ladies. What were't worth to knowThe secret of your conference?
My good lord,Not your demand; it values not your asking:Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It was a gentle business, and becomingThe action of good women: there is hopeAll will be well.
Now, I pray God, amen!
You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady, Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note's Ta'en of your many virtues, the king's majesty Commends his good opinion of you, and Does purpose honour to you no less flowing Than Marchioness of Pembroke: to which title A thousand pound a year, annual support, Out of his grace he adds.
I do not know What kind of my obedience I should tender; More than my all is nothing: nor my prayers Are not words duly hallow'd, nor my wishes More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship, Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience, As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness; Whose health and royalty I pray for.
Lady, I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit The king hath of you. I have perused her well; Beauty and honour in her are so mingled That they have caught the king: and who knows yet But from this lady may proceed a gem To lighten all this isle? I'll to the king, And say I spoke with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My honour'd lord.
Why, this it is; see, see! I have been begging sixteen years in court, Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could Come pat betwixt too early and too late For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate! A very fresh-fish here—fie, fie, fie upon This compell'd fortune!—have your mouth fill'd up Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? is it bitter? forty pence, no. There was a lady once, 'tis an old story, That would not be a queen, that would she not, For all the mud in Egypt: have you heard it?
Come, you are pleasant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With your theme, I could O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke! A thousand pounds a year for pure respect! No other obligation! By my life, That promises moe thousands: honour's train Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time I know your back will bear a duchess: say, Are you not stronger than you were?
Good lady, Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy, And leave me out on't. Would I had no being, If this salute my blood a jot: it faints me, To think what follows. The queen is comfortless, and we forgetful In our long absence: pray, do not deliver What here you've heard to her.
What do you think me?
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,Let silence be commanded.
What's the need? It hath already publicly been read, And on all sides the authority allow'd; You may, then, spare that time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be't so. Proceed.
Say, Henry King of England, come into the court.
Henry King of England, & c.
Here.
Say, Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Katharine Queen of England, & c.
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice; And to bestow your pity on me: for I am a most poor woman, and a stranger, Born out of your dominions; having here No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir, In what have I offended you? what cause Hath my behavior given to your displeasure, That thus you should proceed to put me off, And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness, I have been to you a true and humble wife, At all times to your will conformable; Ever in fear to kindle your dislike, Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry As I saw it inclined: when was the hour I ever contradicted your desire, Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends Have I not strove to love, although I knew He were mine enemy? what friend of mine That had to him derived your anger, did I Continue in my liking? nay, gave notice He was from thence discharged. Sir, call to mind That I have been your wife, in this obedience, Upward of twenty years, and have been blest With many children by you: if, in the course And process of this time, you can report, And prove it too, against mine honour aught, My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty, Against your sacred person, in God's name, Turn me away; and let the foul'st contempt Shut door upon me, and so give me up To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you sir, The king, your father, was reputed for A prince most prudent, of an excellent And unmatch'd wit and judgment: Ferdinand, My father, king of Spain, was reckon'd one The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many A year before: it is not to be question'd That they had gather'd a wise council to them Of every realm, that did debate this business, Who deem'd our marriage lawful: wherefore I humbly Beseech you, sir, to spare me, till I may Be by my friends in Spain advised; whose counsel I will implore: if not, i' the name of God, Your pleasure be fulfill'd!
You have here, lady, And of your choice, these reverend fathers; men Of singular integrity and learning, Yea, the elect o' the land, who are assembled To plead your cause: it shall be therefore bootless That longer you desire the court; as well For your own quiet, as to rectify What is unsettled in the king.
His grace Hath spoken well and justly: therefore, madam, It's fit this royal session do proceed; And that, without delay, their arguments Be now produced and heard.
Lord cardinal,To you I speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your pleasure, madam?
Sir, I am about to weep; but, thinking that We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain The daughter of a king, my drops of tears I'll turn to sparks of fire.
Be patient yet.
I will, when you are humble; nay, before, Or God will punish me. I do believe, Induced by potent circumstances, that You are mine enemy, and make my challenge You shall not be my judge: for it is you Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me; Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again, I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul Refuse you for my judge; whom, yet once more, I hold my most malicious foe, and think not At all a friend to truth.
I do profess You speak not like yourself; who ever yet Have stood to charity, and display'd the effects Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom O'ertopping woman's power. Madam, you do me wrong: I have no spleen against you; nor injustice For you or any: how far I have proceeded, Or how far further shall, is warranted By a commission from the consistory, Yea, the whole consistory of Rome. You charge me That I have blown this coal: I do deny it: The king is present: if it be known to him That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound, And worthily, my falsehood! yea, as much As you have done my truth. If he know That I am free of your report, he knows I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him It lies to cure me: and the cure is, to Remove these thoughts from you: the which before His highness shall speak in, I do beseech You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking And to say so no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, my lord, I am a simple woman, much too weak To oppose your cunning. You're meek and humble-mouth'd; You sign your place and calling, in full seeming, With meekness and humility; but your heart Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride. You have, by fortune and his highness' favours, Gone slightly o'er low steps and now are mounted Where powers are your retainers, and your words, Domestics to you, serve your will as't please Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you, You tender more your person's honour than Your high profession spiritual: that again I do refuse you for my judge; and here, Before you all, appeal unto the pope, To bring my whole cause 'fore his holiness, And to be judged by him.
The queen is obstinate, Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and Disdainful to be tried by't: 'tis not well. She's going away.
Call her again.
Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
Madam, you are call'd back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What need you note it? pray you, keep your way: When you are call'd, return. Now, the Lord help, They vex me past my patience! Pray you, pass on: I will not tarry; no, nor ever more Upon this business my appearance make In any of their courts.
Go thy ways, Kate: That man i' the world who shall report he has A better wife, let him in nought be trusted, For speaking false in that: thou art, alone, If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness, Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government, Obeying in commanding, and thy parts Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out, The queen of earthly queens: she's noble born; And, like her true nobility, she has Carried herself towards me.
Most gracious sir, In humblest manner I require your highness, That it shall please you to declare, in hearing Of all these ears,— for where I am robb'd and bound, There must I be unloosed, although not there At once and fully satisfied,— whether ever I Did broach this business to your highness; or Laid any scruple in your way, which might Induce you to the question on't? or ever Have to you, but with thanks to God for such A royal lady, spake one the least word that might Be to the prejudice of her present state, Or touch of her good person?
My lord cardinal, I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour, I free you from't. You are not to be taught That you have many enemies, that know not Why they are so, but, like to village-curs, Bark when their fellows do: by some of these The queen is put in anger. You're excused: But will you be more justified? You ever Have wish'd the sleeping of this business; never desired It to be stirr'd; but oft have hinder'd, oft, The passages made toward it: on my honour, I speak my good lord cardinal to this point, And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to't, I will be bold with time and your attention: Then mark the inducement. Thus it came; give heed to't: My conscience first received a tenderness, Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter'd By the Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador; Who had been hither sent on the debating A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and Our daughter Mary: i' the progress of this business, Ere a determinate resolution, he, I mean the bishop, did require a respite; Wherein he might the king his lord advertise Whether our daughter were legitimate, Respecting this our marriage with the dowager, Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook The bosom of my conscience, enter'd me, Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble The region of my breast; which forced such way, That many mazed considerings did throng And press'd in with this caution. First, methought I stood not in the smile of heaven; who had Commanded nature, that my lady's womb, If it conceived a male child by me, should Do no more offices of life to't than The grave does to the dead; for her male issue Or died where they were made, or shortly after This world had air'd them: hence I took a thought, This was a judgment on me; that my kingdom, Well worthy the best heir o' the world, should not Be gladded in't by me: then follows, that I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in By this my issue's fail; and that gave to me Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer Toward this remedy, whereupon we are Now present here together: that's to say, I meant to rectify my conscience,—which I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,— By all the reverend fathers of the land And doctors learn'd: first I began in private With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remember How under my oppression I did reek, When I first moved you.
Very well, my liege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have spoke long: be pleased yourself to sayHow far you satisfied me.
So please your highness, The question did at first so stagger me, Bearing a state of mighty moment in't And consequence of dread, that I committed The daring'st counsel which I had to doubt; And did entreat your highness to this course Which you are running here.
I then moved you, My Lord of Canterbury; and got your leave To make this present summons: unsolicited I left no reverend person in this court; But by particular consent proceeded Under your hands and seals: therefore, go on: For no dislike i' the world against the person Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points Of my alleged reasons, drive this forward: Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life And kingly dignity, we are contented To wear our mortal state to come with her, Katharine our queen, before the primest creature That's paragon'd o' the world.
So please your highness, The queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness That we adjourn this court till further day: Meanwhile must be an earnest motion Made to the queen, to call back her appeal She intends unto his holiness.
[Aside] I may perceive These cardinals trifle with me: I abhor This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome. My learn'd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer, Prithee, return: with thy approach, I know, My comfort comes along. Break up the court: I say, set on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take thy lute, wench: my soul grows sad with troubles;Sing, and disperse 'em, if thou canst: leave working.
[singing] Orpheus with his lute made trees, And the mountain tops that freeze, Bow themselves when he did sing: To his music plants and flowers Ever sprung; as sun and showers There had made a lasting spring. Every thing that heard him play, Even the billows of the sea, Hung their heads, and then lay by. In sweet music is such art, Killing care and grief of heart Fall asleep, or hearing, die.
How now!
An't please your grace, the two great cardinalsWait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They will'd me say so, madam.
Pray their gracesTo come near.
What can be their business With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour? I do not like their coming. Now I think on't, They should be good men; their affairs as righteous: But all hoods make not monks.
Peace to your highness!
Your graces find me here part of a housewife,I would be all, against the worst may happen.What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May it please you noble madam, to withdrawInto your private chamber, we shall give youThe full cause of our coming.
Speak it here: There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience, Deserves a corner: would all other women Could speak this with as free a soul as I do! My lords, I care not, so much I am happy Above a number, if my actions Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw 'em, Envy and base opinion set against 'em, I know my life so even. If your business Seek me out, and that way I am wife in, Out with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.
Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, reginaserenissima,—
O, good my lord, no Latin; I am not such a truant since my coming, As not to know the language I have lived in: A strange tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious; Pray, speak in English: here are some will thank you, If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake; Believe me, she has had much wrong: lord cardinal, The willing'st sin I ever yet committed May be absolved in English.
Noble lady, I am sorry my integrity should breed, And service to his majesty and you, So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant. We come not by the way of accusation, To taint that honour every good tongue blesses, Nor to betray you any way to sorrow, You have too much, good lady; but to know How you stand minded in the weighty difference Between the king and you; and to deliver, Like free and honest men, our just opinions And comforts to your cause.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most honour'd madam, My Lord of York, out of his noble nature, Zeal and obedience he still bore your grace, Forgetting, like a good man your late censure Both of his truth and him, which was too far, Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace, His service and his counsel.
[Aside] To betray me.— My lords, I thank you both for your good wills; Ye speak like honest men; pray God, ye prove so! But how to make ye suddenly an answer, In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,— More near my life, I fear,—with my weak wit, And to such men of gravity and learning, In truth, I know not. I was set at work Among my maids: full little, God knows, looking Either for such men or such business. For her sake that I have been,—for I feel The last fit of my greatness,— good your graces, Let me have time and counsel for my cause: Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!
Madam, you wrong the king's love with these fears:Your hopes and friends are infinite.
In England But little for my profit: can you think, lords, That any Englishman dare give me counsel? Or be a known friend, 'gainst his highness' pleasure, Though he be grown so desperate to be honest, And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends, They that must weigh out my afflictions, They that my trust must grow to, live not here: They are, as all my other comforts, far hence In mine own country, lords.
I would your graceWould leave your griefs, and take my counsel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How, sir?
Put your main cause into the king's protection; He's loving and most gracious: 'twill be much Both for your honour better and your cause; For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye, You'll part away disgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both,—my ruin: Is this your Christian counsel? out upon ye! Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge That no king can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The more shame for ye: holy men I thought ye, Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues; But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye: Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort? The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady, A woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd? I will not wish ye half my miseries; I have more charity: but say, I warn'd ye; Take heed, for heaven's sake, take heed, lest at once The burthen of my sorrows fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a mere distraction;You turn the good we offer into envy.
Ye turn me into nothing: woe upon ye And all such false professors! would you have me— If you have any justice, any pity; If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits— Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me? Alas, has banish'd me his bed already, His love, too long ago! I am old, my lords, And all the fellowship I hold now with him Is only my obedience. What can happen To me above this wretchedness? all your studies Make me a curse like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thus long—let me speak myself, Since virtue finds no friends—a wife, a true one? A woman, I dare say without vain-glory, Never yet branded with suspicion? Have I with all my full affections Still met the king? loved him next heaven? obey'd him? Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him? Almost forgot my prayers to content him? And am I thus rewarded? 'tis not well, lords. Bring me a constant woman to her husband, One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure; And to that woman, when she has done most, Yet will I add an honour, a great patience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty, To give up willingly that noble title Your master wed me to: nothing but death Shall e'er divorce my dignities.
Pray, hear me.
Would I had never trod this English earth, Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it! Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts. What will become of me now, wretched lady! I am the most unhappy woman living. Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes! Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity, No friend, no hope; no kindred weep for me; Almost no grave allow'd me: like the lily, That once was mistress of the field and flourish'd, I'll hang my head and perish.
If your grace Could but be brought to know our ends are honest, You'ld feel more comfort: why should we, good lady, Upon what cause, wrong you? alas, our places, The way of our profession is against it: We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em. For goodness' sake, consider what you do; How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly Grow from the king's acquaintance, by this carriage. The hearts of princes kiss obedience, So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits They swell, and grow as terrible as storms. I know you have a gentle, noble temper, A soul as even as a calm: pray, think us Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues With these weak women's fears: a noble spirit, As yours was put into you, ever casts Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The king loves you; Beware you lose it not: for us, if you please To trust us in your business, we are ready To use our utmost studies in your service.
Do what ye will, my lords: and, pray, forgive me, If I have used myself unmannerly; You know I am a woman, lacking wit To make a seemly answer to such persons. Pray, do my service to his majesty: He has my heart yet; and shall have my prayers While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers, Bestow your counsels on me: she now begs, That little thought, when she set footing here, She should have bought her dignities so dear.
If you will now unite in your complaints, And force them with a constancy, the cardinal Cannot stand under them: if you omit The offer of this time, I cannot promise But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces, With these you bear already.
I am joyful To meet the least occasion that may give me Remembrance of my father-in-law, the duke, To be revenged on him.
Which of the peers Have uncontemn'd gone by him, or at least Strangely neglected? when did he regard The stamp of nobleness in any person Out of himself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lords, you speak your pleasures: What he deserves of you and me I know; What we can do to him, though now the time Gives way to us, I much fear. If you cannot Bar his access to the king, never attempt Any thing on him; for he hath a witchcraft Over the king in's tongue.
O, fear him not; His spell in that is out: the king hath found Matter against him that for ever mars The honey of his language. No, he's settled, Not to come off, in his displeasure.
Sir,I should be glad to hear such news as thisOnce every hour.
Believe it, this is true: In the divorce his contrary proceedings Are all unfolded wherein he appears As I would wish mine enemy.
How cameHis practises to light?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most strangely.
O, how, how?
The cardinal's letters to the pope miscarried, And came to the eye o' the king: wherein was read, How that the cardinal did entreat his holiness To stay the judgment o' the divorce; for if It did take place, 'I do,' quoth he, 'perceive My king is tangled in affection to A creature of the queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'
Has the king this?
Believe it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will this work?
The king in this perceives him, how he coasts And hedges his own way. But in this point All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic After his patient's death: the king already Hath married the fair lady.
Would he had!
May you be happy in your wish, my lordFor, I profess, you have it.
Now, all my joyTrace the conjunction!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My amen to't!
All men's!
There's order given for her coronation: Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords, She is a gallant creature, and complete In mind and feature: I persuade me, from her Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall In it be memorised.
But, will the kingDigest this letter of the cardinal's?The Lord forbid!
Marry, amen!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no; There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius Is stol'n away to Rome; hath ta'en no leave; Has left the cause o' the king unhandled; and Is posted, as the agent of our cardinal, To second all his plot. I do assure you The king cried Ha! at this.
Now, God incense him,And let him cry Ha! louder!
But, my lord,When returns Cranmer?
He is return'd in his opinions; which Have satisfied the king for his divorce, Together with all famous colleges Almost in Christendom: shortly, I believe, His second marriage shall be publish'd, and Her coronation. Katharine no more Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager And widow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmer'sA worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much painIn the king's business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He has; and we shall see himFor it an archbishop.
So I hear.
'Tis so.The cardinal!
Observe, observe, he's moody.
The packet, Cromwell.Gave't you the king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To his own hand, in's bedchamber.
Look'd he o' the inside of the paper?
Presently He did unseal them: and the first he view'd, He did it with a serious mind; a heed Was in his countenance. You he bade Attend him here this morning.
Is he readyTo come abroad?
I think, by this he is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Leave me awhile.
[Aside] It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon, The French king's sister: he shall marry her. Anne Bullen! No; I'll no Anne Bullens for him: There's more in't than fair visage. Bullen! No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
He's discontented.
May be, he hears the kingDoes whet his anger to him.
Sharp enough,Lord, for thy justice!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] The late queen's gentlewoman, a knight's daughter, To be her mistress' mistress! the queen's queen! This candle burns not clear: 'tis I must snuff it; Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous And well deserving? yet I know her for A spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to Our cause, that she should lie i' the bosom of Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer; one Hath crawl'd into the favour of the king, And is his oracle.
He is vex'd at something.
I would 'twere something that would fret the string,The master-cord on's heart!
The king, the king!
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated To his own portion! and what expense by the hour Seems to flow from him! How, i' the name of thrift, Does he rake this together! Now, my lords, Saw you the cardinal?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, we have Stood here observing him: some strange commotion Is in his brain: he bites his lip, and starts; Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground, Then lays his finger on his temple, straight Springs out into fast gait; then stops again, Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts His eye against the moon: in most strange postures We have seen him set himself.
It may well be; There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning Papers of state he sent me to peruse, As I required: and wot you what I found There,—on my conscience, put unwittingly? Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing; The several parcels of his plate, his treasure, Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which I find at such proud rate, that it out-speaks Possession of a subject.
It's heaven's will:Some spirit put this paper in the packet,To bless your eye withal.
If we did think His contemplation were above the earth, And fix'd on spiritual object, he should still Dwell in his musings: but I am afraid His thinkings are below the moon, not worth His serious considering.
Heaven forgive me!Ever God bless your highness!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my lord, You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory Of your best graces in your mind; the which You were now running o'er: you have scarce time To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span To keep your earthly audit: sure, in that I deem you an ill husband, and am glad To have you therein my companion.
Sir, For holy offices I have a time; a time To think upon the part of business which I bear i' the state; and nature does require Her times of preservation, which perforce I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal, Must give my tendence to.
You have said well.
And ever may your highness yoke together,As I will lend you cause, my doing wellWith my well saying!
'Tis well said again; And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well: And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you: He said he did; and with his deed did crown His word upon you. Since I had my office, I have kept you next my heart; have not alone Employ'd you where high profits might come home, But pared my present havings, to bestow My bounties upon you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] What should this mean?
[Aside] The Lord increase this business!
Have I not made you, The prime man of the state? I pray you, tell me, If what I now pronounce you have found true: And, if you may confess it, say withal, If you are bound to us or no. What say you?
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces, Shower'd on me daily, have been more than could My studied purposes requite; which went Beyond all man's endeavours: my endeavours Have ever come too short of my desires, Yet filed with my abilities: mine own ends Have been mine so that evermore they pointed To the good of your most sacred person and The profit of the state. For your great graces Heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, I Can nothing render but allegiant thanks, My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty, Which ever has and ever shall be growing, Till death, that winter, kill it.
Fairly answer'd; A loyal and obedient subject is Therein illustrated: the honour of it Does pay the act of it; as, i' the contrary, The foulness is the punishment. I presume That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you, My heart dropp'd love, my power rain'd honour, more On you than any; so your hand and heart, Your brain, and every function of your power, Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty, As 'twere in love's particular, be more To me, your friend, than any.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do profess That for your highness' good I ever labour'd More than mine own; that am, have, and will be— Though all the world should crack their duty to you, And throw it from their soul; though perils did Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and Appear in forms more horrid,— yet my duty, As doth a rock against the chiding flood, Should the approach of this wild river break, And stand unshaken yours.
'Tis nobly spoken:Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,For you have seen him open't. Read o'er this;
And after, this: and then to breakfast withWhat appetite you have.
What should this mean? What sudden anger's this? how have I reap'd it? He parted frowning from me, as if ruin Leap'd from his eyes: so looks the chafed lion Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him; Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper; I fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so; This paper has undone me: 'tis the account Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together For mine own ends; indeed, to gain the popedom, And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence! Fit for a fool to fall by: what cross devil Made me put this main secret in the packet I sent the king? Is there no way to cure this? No new device to beat this from his brains? I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune Will bring me off again. What's this? 'To the Pope!' The letter, as I live, with all the business I writ to's holiness. Nay then, farewell! I have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness; And, from that full meridian of my glory, I haste now to my setting: I shall fall Like a bright exhalation in the evening, And no man see me more.
Hear the king's pleasure, cardinal: who commands you To render up the great seal presently Into our hands; and to confine yourself To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's, Till you hear further from his highness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay:Where's your commission, lords? words cannot carryAuthority so weighty.
Who dare cross 'em,Bearing the king's will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more than will or words to do it, I mean your malice, know, officious lords, I dare and must deny it. Now I feel Of what coarse metal ye are moulded, envy: How eagerly ye follow my disgraces, As if it fed ye! and how sleek and wanton Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin! Follow your envious courses, men of malice; You have Christian warrant for 'em, and, no doubt, In time will find their fit rewards. That seal, You ask with such a violence, the king, Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me; Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours, During my life; and, to confirm his goodness, Tied it by letters-patents: now, who'll take it?
The king, that gave it.
It must be himself, then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art a proud traitor, priest.
Proud lord, thou liest:Within these forty hours Surrey durst betterHave burnt that tongue than said so.
Thy ambition, Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law: The heads of all thy brother cardinals, With thee and all thy best parts bound together, Weigh'd not a hair of his. Plague of your policy! You sent me deputy for Ireland; Far from his succor, from the king, from all That might have mercy on the fault thou gavest him; Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity, Absolved him with an axe.
This, and all else This talking lord can lay upon my credit, I answer is most false. The duke by law Found his deserts: how innocent I was From any private malice in his end, His noble jury and foul cause can witness. If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you You have as little honesty as honour, That in the way of loyalty and truth Toward the king, my ever royal master, Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be, And all that love his follies.
By my soul, Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords, Can ye endure to hear this arrogance? And from this fellow? if we live thus tamely, To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet, Farewell nobility; let his grace go forward, And dare us with his cap like larks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All goodnessIs poison to thy stomach.
Yes, that goodness Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one, Into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion; The goodness of your intercepted packets You writ to the pope against the king: your goodness, Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious. My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble, As you respect the common good, the state Of our despised nobility, our issues, Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen, Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles Collected from his life. I'll startle you Worse than the scaring bell, when the brown wench Lay kissing in your arms, lord cardinal.
How much, methinks, I could despise this man,But that I am bound in charity against it!
Those articles, my lord, are in the king's hand:But, thus much, they are foul ones.
So much fairerAnd spotless shall mine innocence arise,When the king knows my truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This cannot save you: I thank my memory, I yet remember Some of these articles; and out they shall. Now, if you can blush and cry 'guilty,' cardinal, You'll show a little honesty.
Speak on, sir;I dare your worst objections: if I blush,It is to see a nobleman want manners.
I had rather want those than my head. Have at you! First, that, without the king's assent or knowledge, You wrought to be a legate; by which power You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus' Was still inscribed; in which you brought the king To be your servant.
Then that, without the knowledge Either of king or council, when you went Ambassador to the emperor, you made bold To carry into Flanders the great seal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Item, you sent a large commission To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude, Without the king's will or the state's allowance, A league between his highness and Ferrara.
That, out of mere ambition, you have causedYour holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin.
Then that you have sent innumerable substance— By what means got, I leave to your own conscience— To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways You have for dignities; to the mere undoing Of all the kingdom. Many more there are; Which, since they are of you, and odious, I will not taint my mouth with.
O my lord, Press not a falling man too far! 'tis virtue: His faults lie open to the laws; let them, Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him So little of his great self.
I forgive him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lord cardinal, the king's further pleasure is, Because all those things you have done of late, By your power legatine, within this kingdom, Fall into the compass of a praemunire, That therefore such a writ be sued against you; To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements, Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be Out of the king's protection. This is my charge.
And so we'll leave you to your meditations How to live better. For your stubborn answer About the giving back the great seal to us, The king shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you. So fare you well, my little good lord cardinal.
So farewell to the little good you bear me. Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness! This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms, And bears his blushing honours thick upon him; The third day comes a frost, a killing frost, And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root, And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured, Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders, This many summers in a sea of glory, But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride At length broke under me and now has left me, Weary and old with service, to the mercy Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye: I feel my heart new open'd. O, how wretched Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours! There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to, That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin, More pangs and fears than wars or women have: And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer, Never to hope again.
Why, how now, Cromwell!
I have no power to speak, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, amazed At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep, I am fall'n indeed.
How does your grace?
Why, well; Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell. I know myself now; and I feel within me A peace above all earthly dignities, A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me, I humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders, These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken A load would sink a navy, too much honour: O, 'tis a burthen, Cromwell, 'tis a burthen Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!
I am glad your grace has made that right use of it.
I hope I have: I am able now, methinks, Out of a fortitude of soul I feel, To endure more miseries and greater far Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer. What news abroad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The heaviest and the worstIs your displeasure with the king.
God bless him!
The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosenLord chancellor in your place.
That's somewhat sudden: But he's a learned man. May he continue Long in his highness' favour, and do justice For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones, When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings, May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on em! What more?
That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,Install'd lord archbishop of Canterbury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's news indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne, Whom the king hath in secrecy long married, This day was view'd in open as his queen, Going to chapel; and the voice is now Only about her coronation.
There was the weight that pull'd me down. O Cromwell, The king has gone beyond me: all my glories In that one woman I have lost for ever: No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours, Or gild again the noble troops that waited Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell; I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now To be thy lord and master: seek the king; That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him What and how true thou art: he will advance thee; Some little memory of me will stir him— I know his noble nature—not to let Thy hopeful service perish too: good Cromwell, Neglect him not; make use now, and provide For thine own future safety.
O my lord, Must I, then, leave you? must I needs forego So good, so noble and so true a master? Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron, With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord. The king shall have my service: but my prayers For ever and for ever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me, Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman. Let's dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, Cromwell; And, when I am forgotten, as I shall be, And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee, Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory, And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour, Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in; A sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it. Mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me. Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition: By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then, The image of his Maker, hope to win by it? Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee; Corruption wins not more than honesty. Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace, To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not: Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's, Thy God's, and truth's; then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell, Thou fall'st a blessed martyr! Serve the king; And,—prithee, lead me in: There take an inventory of all I have, To the last penny; 'tis the king's: my robe, And my integrity to heaven, is all I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell! Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my king, he would not in mine age Have left me naked to mine enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good sir, have patience.
So I have. FarewellThe hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell.
You're well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here, and beholdThe Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis all my business. At our last encounter,The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
'Tis very true: but that time offer'd sorrow;This, general joy.
'Tis well: the citizens, I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds— As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward— In celebration of this day with shows, Pageants and sights of honour.
Never greater,Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
May I be bold to ask at what that contains,That paper in your hand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes; 'tis the list Of those that claim their offices this day By custom of the coronation. The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims To be high-steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk, He to be earl marshal: you may read the rest.
I thank you, sir: had I not known those customs, I should have been beholding to your paper. But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine, The princess dowager? how goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop Of Canterbury, accompanied with other Learned and reverend fathers of his order, Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off From Ampthill where the princess lay; to which She was often cited by them, but appear'd not: And, to be short, for not appearance and The king's late scruple, by the main assent Of all these learned men she was divorced, And the late marriage made of none effect Since which she was removed to Kimbolton, Where she remains now sick.
Alas, good lady!
The trumpets sound: stand close, the queen is coming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A royal train, believe me. These I know:Who's that that bears the sceptre?
Marquess Dorset:And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
A bold brave gentleman. That should beThe Duke of Suffolk?
'Tis the same: high-steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes.
[Looking on QUEEN ANNE] Heaven bless thee! Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on. Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel; Our king has all the Indies in his arms, And more and richer, when he strains that lady: I cannot blame his conscience.
They that bearThe cloth of honour over her, are four baronsOf the Cinque-ports.
Those men are happy; and so are all are near her.I take it, she that carries up the trainIs that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is; and all the rest are countesses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed;And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
God save you, sir! where have you been broiling?
Among the crowd i' the Abbey; where a fingerCould not be wedged in more: I am stifledWith the mere rankness of their joy.
You sawThe ceremony?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I did.
How was it?
Well worth the seeing.
Good sir, speak it to us.
As well as I am able. The rich stream Of lords and ladies, having brought the queen To a prepared place in the choir, fell off A distance from her; while her grace sat down To rest awhile, some half an hour or so, In a rich chair of state, opposing freely The beauty of her person to the people. Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman That ever lay by man: which when the people Had the full view of, such a noise arose As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest, As loud, and to as many tunes: hats, cloaks— Doublets, I think,—flew up; and had their faces Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy I never saw before. Great-bellied women, That had not half a week to go, like rams In the old time of war, would shake the press, And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living Could say 'This is my wife' there; all were woven So strangely in one piece.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, what follow'd?
At length her grace rose, and with modest paces Came to the altar; where she kneel'd, and saint-like Cast her fair eyes to heaven and pray'd devoutly. Then rose again and bow'd her to the people: When by the Archbishop of Canterbury She had all the royal makings of a queen; As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown, The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems Laid nobly on her: which perform'd, the choir, With all the choicest music of the kingdom, Together sung 'Te Deum.' So she parted, And with the same full state paced back again To York-place, where the feast is held.
Sir, You must no more call it York-place, that's past; For, since the cardinal fell, that title's lost: 'Tis now the king's, and call'd Whitehall.
I know it;But 'tis so lately alter'd, that the old nameIs fresh about me.
What two reverend bishopsWere those that went on each side of the queen?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stokesly and Gardiner; the one of Winchester,Newly preferr'd from the king's secretary,The other, London.
He of WinchesterIs held no great good lover of the archbishop's,The virtuous Cranmer.
All the land knows that:However, yet there is no great breach; when it comes,Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you?
Thomas Cromwell; A man in much esteem with the king, and truly A worthy friend. The king has made him master O' the jewel house, And one, already, of the privy council.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He will deserve more.
Yes, without all doubt. Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which Is to the court, and there ye shall be my guests: Something I can command. As I walk thither, I'll tell ye more.
You may command us, sir.
How does your grace?
O Griffith, sick to death! My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth, Willing to leave their burthen. Reach a chair: So; now, methinks, I feel a little ease. Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me, That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, madam; but I think your grace,Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died:If well, he stepp'd before me, happilyFor my example.
Well, the voice goes, madam: For after the stout Earl Northumberland Arrested him at York, and brought him forward, As a man sorely tainted, to his answer, He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill He could not sit his mule.
Alas, poor man!
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester, Lodged in the abbey; where the reverend abbot, With all his covent, honourably received him; To whom he gave these words, 'O, father abbot, An old man, broken with the storms of state, Is come to lay his weary bones among ye; Give him a little earth for charity!' So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness Pursued him still: and, three nights after this, About the hour of eight, which he himself Foretold should be his last, full of repentance, Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows, He gave his honours to the world again, His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him! Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him, And yet with charity. He was a man Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion, Tied all the kingdom: simony was fair-play; His own opinion was his law: i' the presence He would say untruths; and be ever double Both in his words and meaning: he was never, But where he meant to ruin, pitiful: His promises were, as he then was, mighty; But his performance, as he is now, nothing: Of his own body he was ill, and gave The clergy in example.
Noble madam, Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues We write in water. May it please your highness To hear me speak his good now?
Yes, good Griffith;I were malicious else.
This cardinal, Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle. He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one; Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading: Lofty and sour to them that loved him not; But to those men that sought him sweet as summer. And though he were unsatisfied in getting, Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam, He was most princely: ever witness for him Those twins of learning that he raised in you, Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him, Unwilling to outlive the good that did it; The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous, So excellent in art, and still so rising, That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue. His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him; For then, and not till then, he felt himself, And found the blessedness of being little: And, to add greater honours to his age Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
After my death I wish no other herald, No other speaker of my living actions, To keep mine honour from corruption, But such an honest chronicler as Griffith. Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me, With thy religious truth and modesty, Now in his ashes honour: peace be with him! Patience, be near me still; and set me lower: I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith, Cause the musicians play me that sad note I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating On that celestial harmony I go to.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is asleep: good wench, let's sit down quiet,For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, where are ye? are ye all gone,And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for:Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun? They promised me eternal happiness; And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall, assuredly.
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreamsPossess your fancy.
Bid the music leave,They are harsh and heavy to me.
Do you note How much her grace is alter'd on the sudden? How long her face is drawn? how pale she looks, And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes!
She is going, wench: pray, pray.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heaven comfort her!
An't like your grace,—
You are a saucy fellow:Deserve we no more reverence?
You are to blame,Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,To use so rude behavior; go to, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your highness' pardon;My haste made me unmannerly. There is stayingA gentleman, sent from the king, to see you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Admit him entrance, Griffith: but this fellowLet me ne'er see again.
If my sight fail not,You should be lord ambassador from the emperor,My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.
Madam, the same; your servant.
O, my lord, The times and titles now are alter'd strangely With me since first you knew me. But, I pray you, What is your pleasure with me?
Noble lady, First mine own service to your grace; the next, The king's request that I would visit you; Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me Sends you his princely commendations, And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my good lord, that comfort comes too late; 'Tis like a pardon after execution: That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me; But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers. How does his highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do! and ever flourish, When I shal l dwell with worms, and my poor name Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter, I caused you write, yet sent away?
No, madam.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliverThis to my lord the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most willing, madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter; The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her! Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding— She is young, and of a noble modest nature, I hope she will deserve well,—and a little To love her for her mother's sake, that loved him, Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition Is, that his noble grace would have some pity Upon my wretched women, that so long Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully: Of which there is not one, I dare avow, And now I should not lie, but will deserve For virtue and true beauty of the soul, For honesty and decent carriage, A right good husband, let him be a noble And, sure, those men are happy that shall have 'em. The last is, for my men; they are the poorest, But poverty could never draw 'em from me; That they may have their wages duly paid 'em, And something over to remember me by: If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life And able means, we had not parted thus. These are the whole contents: and, good my lord, By that you love the dearest in this world, As you wish Christian peace to souls departed, Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the king To do me this last right.
By heaven, I will,Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
I thank you, honest lord. Remember me In all humility unto his highness: Say his long trouble now is passing Out of this world; tell him, in death I bless'd him, For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell, My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience, You must not leave me yet: I must to bed; Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench, Let me be used with honour: strew me over With maiden flowers, that all the world may know I was a chaste wife to my grave: embalm me, Then lay me forth: although unqueen'd, yet like A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me. I can no more.
It's one o'clock, boy, is't not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It hath struck.
These should be hours for necessities, Not for delights; times to repair our nature With comforting repose, and not for us To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas! Whither so late?
Came you from the king, my lord?
I did, Sir Thomas: and left him at primeroWith the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too,Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter? It seems you are in haste: an if there be No great offence belongs to't, give your friend Some touch of your late business: affairs, that walk, As they say spirits do, at midnight, have In them a wilder nature than the business That seeks dispatch by day.
My lord, I love you; And durst commend a secret to your ear Much weightier than this work. The queen's in labour, They say, in great extremity; and fear'd She'll with the labour end.
The fruit she goes with I pray for heartily, that it may find Good time, and live: but for the stock, Sir Thomas, I wish it grubb'd up now.
Methinks I could Cry the amen; and yet my conscience says She's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does Deserve our better wishes.
But, sir, sir, Hear me, Sir Thomas: you're a gentleman Of mine own way; I know you wise, religious; And, let me tell you, it will ne'er be well, 'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take't of me, Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she, Sleep in their graves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, sir, you speak of two The most remark'd i' the kingdom. As for Cromwell, Beside that of the jewel house, is made master O' the rolls, and the king's secretary; further, sir, Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments, With which the time will load him. The archbishop Is the king's hand and tongue; and who dare speak One syllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas, There are that dare; and I myself have ventured To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day, Sir, I may tell it you, I think I have Incensed the lords o' the council, that he is, For so I know he is, they know he is, A most arch heretic, a pestilence That does infect the land: with which they moved Have broken with the king; who hath so far Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded To-morrow morning to the council-board He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas, And we must root him out. From your affairs I hinder you too long: good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my lord: I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play no more tonight;My mind's not on't; you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But little, Charles;Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.Now, Lovell, from the queen what is the news?
I could not personally deliver to her What you commanded me, but by her woman I sent your message; who return'd her thanks In the great'st humbleness, and desired your highness Most heartily to pray for her.
What say'st thou, ha?To pray for her? what, is she crying out?
So said her woman; and that her sufferance madeAlmost each pang a death.
Alas, good lady!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God safely quit her of her burthen, andWith gentle travail, to the gladding ofYour highness with an heir!
'Tis midnight, Charles; Prithee, to bed; and in thy prayers remember The estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone; For I must think of that which company Would not be friendly to.
I wish your highnessA quiet night; and my good mistress willRemember in my prayers.
Charles, good night.
Well, sir, what follows?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I have brought my lord the archbishop,As you commanded me.
Ha! Canterbury?
Ay, my good lord.
'Tis true: where is he, Denny?
He attends your highness' pleasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] This is about that which the bishop spake:I am happily come hither.
Avoid the gallery.
Ha! I have said. Be gone. What!
[Aside] I am fearful: wherefore frowns he thus?'Tis his aspect of terror. All's not well.
How now, my lord! you desire to knowWherefore I sent for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Kneeling] It is my dutyTo attend your highness' pleasure.
Pray you, arise, My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury. Come, you and I must walk a turn together; I have news to tell you: come, come, give me your hand. Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak, And am right sorry to repeat what follows I have, and most unwillingly, of late Heard many grievous, I do say, my lord, Grievous complaints of you; which, being consider'd, Have moved us and our council, that you shall This morning come before us; where, I know, You cannot with such freedom purge yourself, But that, till further trial in those charges Which will require your answer, you must take Your patience to you, and be well contented To make your house our Tower: you a brother of us, It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness Would come against you.
[Kneeling] I humbly thank your highness; And am right glad to catch this good occasion Most throughly to be winnow'd, where my chaff And corn shall fly asunder: for, I know, There's none stands under more calumnious tongues Than I myself, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury: Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted In us, thy friend: give me thy hand, stand up: Prithee, let's walk. Now, by my holidame. What manner of man are you? My lord, I look'd You would have given me your petition, that I should have ta'en some pains to bring together Yourself and your accusers; and to have heard you, Without indurance, further.
Most dread liege, The good I stand on is my truth and honesty: If they shall fail, I, with mine enemies, Will triumph o'er my person; which I weigh not, Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing What can be said against me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know you not How your state stands i' the world, with the whole world? Your enemies are many, and not small; their practises Must bear the same proportion; and not ever The justice and the truth o' the question carries The due o' the verdict with it: at what ease Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt To swear against you? such things have been done. You are potently opposed; and with a malice Of as great size. Ween you of better luck, I mean, in perjured witness, than your master, Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to; You take a precipice for no leap of danger, And woo your own destruction.
God and your majestyProtect mine innocence, or I fall intoThe trap is laid for me!
Be of good cheer; They shall no more prevail than we give way to. Keep comfort to you; and this morning see You do appear before them: if they shall chance, In charging you with matters, to commit you, The best persuasions to the contrary Fail not to use, and with what vehemency The occasion shall instruct you: if entreaties Will render you no remedy, this ring Deliver them, and your appeal to us There make before them. Look, the good man weeps! He's honest, on mine honour. God's blest mother! I swear he is true-hearted; and a soul None better in my kingdom. Get you gone, And do as I have bid you.
He has strangledHis language in his tears.
[Within] Come back: what mean you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll not come back; the tidings that I bring Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person Under their blessed wings!
Now, by thy looksI guess thy message. Is the queen deliver'd?Say, ay; and of a boy.
Ay, ay, my liege; And of a lovely boy: the God of heaven Both now and ever bless her! 'tis a girl, Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen Desires your visitation, and to be Acquainted with this stranger 'tis as like you As cherry is to cherry.
Lovell!
Sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give her an hundred marks. I'll to the queen.
An hundred marks! By this light, I'll ha' more. An ordinary groom is for such payment. I will have more, or scold it out of him. Said I for this, the girl was like to him? I will have more, or else unsay't; and now, While it is hot, I'll put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late; and yet the gentleman, That was sent to me from the council, pray'd me To make great haste. All fast? what means this? Ho! Who waits there? Sure, you know me?
Yes, my lord;But yet I cannot help you.
Why?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your grace must wait till you be call'd for.
So.
[Aside] This is a piece of malice. I am gladI came this way so happily: the kingShall understand it presently.
[Aside] 'Tis Butts, The king's physician: as he pass'd along, How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me! Pray heaven, he sound not my disgrace! For certain, This is of purpose laid by some that hate me— God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice— To quench mine honour: they would shame to make me Wait else at door, a fellow-counsellor, 'Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures Must be fulfill'd, and I attend with patience.
I'll show your grace the strangest sight—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's that, Butts?
I think your highness saw this many a day.
Body o' me, where is it?
There, my lord: The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury; Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants, Pages, and footboys.
Ha! 'tis he, indeed: Is this the honour they do one another? 'Tis well there's one above 'em yet. I had thought They had parted so much honesty among 'em At least, good manners, as not thus to suffer A man of his place, and so near our favour, To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures, And at the door too, like a post with packets. By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery: Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close: We shall hear more anon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak to the business, master-secretary:Why are we met in council?
Please your honours,The chief cause concerns his grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge of it?
Yes.
Who waits there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Without, my noble lords?
Yes.
My lord archbishop;And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your grace may enter now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My good lord archbishop, I'm very sorry To sit here at this present, and behold That chair stand empty: but we all are men, In our own natures frail, and capable Of our flesh; few are angels: out of which frailty And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us, Have misdemean'd yourself, and not a little, Toward the king first, then his laws, in filling The whole realm, by your teaching and your chaplains, For so we are inform'd, with new opinions, Divers and dangerous; which are heresies, And, not reform'd, may prove pernicious.
Which reformation must be sudden too, My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle, But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur 'em, Till they obey the manage. If we suffer, Out of our easiness and childish pity To one man's honour, this contagious sickness, Farewell all physic: and what follows then? Commotions, uproars, with a general taint Of the whole state: as, of late days, our neighbours, The upper Germany, can dearly witness, Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good lords, hitherto, in all the progress Both of my life and office, I have labour'd, And with no little study, that my teaching And the strong course of my authority Might go one way, and safely; and the end Was ever, to do well: nor is there living, I speak it with a single heart, my lords, A man that more detests, more stirs against, Both in his private conscience and his place, Defacers of a public peace, than I do. Pray heaven, the king may never find a heart With less allegiance in it! Men that make Envy and crooked malice nourishment Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships, That, in this case of justice, my accusers, Be what they will, may stand forth face to face, And freely urge against me.
Nay, my lord,That cannot be: you are a counsellor,And, by that virtue, no man dare accuse you.
My lord, because we have business of more moment, We will be short with you. 'Tis his highness' pleasure, And our consent, for better trial of you, From hence you be committed to the Tower; Where, being but a private man again, You shall know many dare accuse you boldly, More than, I fear, you are provided for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you; You are always my good friend; if your will pass, I shall both find your lordship judge and juror, You are so merciful: I see your end; 'Tis my undoing: love and meekness, lord, Become a churchman better than ambition: Win straying souls with modesty again, Cast none away. That I shall clear myself, Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience, I make as little doubt, as you do conscience In doing daily wrongs. I could say more, But reverence to your calling makes me modest.
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary,That's the plain truth: your painted gloss discovers,To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, you are a little, By your good favour, too sharp; men so noble, However faulty, yet should find respect For what they have been: 'tis a cruelty To load a falling man.
Good master secretary,I cry your honour mercy; you may, worstOf all this table, say so.
Why, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do not I know you for a favourerOf this new sect? ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound, I say.
Would you were half so honest!Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this bold language.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do.Remember your bold life too.
This is too much;Forbear, for shame, my lords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed, I take it, by all voices, that forthwith You be convey'd to the Tower a prisoner; There to remain till the king's further pleasure Be known unto us: are you all agreed, lords?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are.
Is there no other way of mercy,But I must needs to the Tower, my lords?
What otherWould you expect? you are strangely troublesome.Let some o' the guard be ready there.
For me?Must I go like a traitor thither?
Receive him,And see him safe i' the Tower.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, good my lords, I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords; By virtue of that ring, I take my cause Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it To a most noble judge, the king my master.
This is the king's ring.
'Tis no counterfeit.
'Tis the right ring, by heaven: I told ye all,When ye first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,'Twould fall upon ourselves.
Do you think, my lords,The king will suffer but the little fingerOf this man to be vex'd?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis now too certain:How much more is his life in value with him?Would I were fairly out on't!
My mind gave me, In seeking tales and informations Against this man, whose honesty the devil And his disciples only envy at, Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye!
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince; Not only good and wise, but most religious: One that, in all obedience, makes the church The chief aim of his honour; and, to strengthen That holy duty, out of dear respect, His royal self in judgment comes to hear The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden commendations, Bishop of Winchester. But know, I come not To hear such flattery now, and in my presence; They are too thin and bare to hide offences. To me you cannot reach, you play the spaniel, And think with wagging of your tongue to win me; But, whatsoe'er thou takest me for, I'm sure Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody. [To CRANMER] Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee: By all that's holy, he had better starve Than but once think this place becomes thee not.
May it please your grace,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, sir, it does not please me. I had thought I had had men of some understanding And wisdom of my council; but I find none. Was it discretion, lords, to let this man, This good man,—few of you deserve that title,— This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy At chamber—door? and one as great as you are? Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye Power as he was a counsellor to try him, Not as a groom: there's some of ye, I see, More out of malice than integrity, Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean; Which ye shall never have while I live.
Thus far, My most dread sovereign, may it like your grace To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed Concerning his imprisonment, was rather, If there be faith in men, meant for his trial, And fair purgation to the world, than malice, I'm sure, in me.
Well, well, my lords, respect him; Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it. I will say thus much for him, if a prince May be beholding to a subject, I Am, for his love and service, so to him. Make me no more ado, but all embrace him: Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of Canterbury, I have a suit which you must not deny me; That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism, You must be godfather, and answer for her.
The greatest monarch now alive may gloryIn such an honour: how may I deserve itThat am a poor and humble subject to you?
Come, come, my lord, you'ld spare your spoons: you shall have two noble partners with you; the old Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady Marquess Dorset: will these please you? Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you, Embrace and love this man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With a true heartAnd brother-love I do it.
And let heavenWitness, how dear I hold this confirmation.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart: The common voice, I see, is verified Of thee, which says thus, 'Do my Lord of Canterbury A shrewd turn, and he is your friend for ever.' Come, lords, we trifle time away; I long To have this young one made a Christian. As I have made ye one, lords, one remain; So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.
You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals: do youtake the court for Paris-garden? ye rude slaves,leave your gaping.
Good master porter, I belong to the larder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Belong to the gallows, and be hanged, ye rogue! is this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves, and strong ones: these are but switches to 'em. I'll scratch your heads: you must be seeing christenings? do you look for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?
Pray, sir, be patient: 'tis as much impossible— Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons— To scatter 'em, as 'tis to make 'em sleep On May-day morning; which will never be: We may as well push against Powle's, as stir em.
How got they in, and be hang'd?
Alas, I know not; how gets the tide in? As much as one sound cudgel of four foot— You see the poor remainder—could distribute, I made no spare, sir.
You did nothing, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand, To mow 'em down before me: but if I spared any That had a head to hit, either young or old, He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker, Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again And that I would not for a cow, God save her!

I shall be with you presently, good master puppy.Keep the door close, sirrah.
What would you have me do?
What should you do, but knock 'em down by the dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? or have we some strange Indian with the great tool come to court, the women so besiege us? Bless me, what a fry of fornication is at door! On my Christian conscience, this one christening will beget a thousand; here will be father, godfather, and all together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a brazier by his face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of the dog-days now reign in's nose; all that stand about him are under the line, they need no other penance: that fire-drake did I hit three times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged against me; he stands there, like a mortar-piece, to blow us. There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him, that railed upon me till her pinked porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a combustion in the state. I missed the meteor once, and hit that woman; who cried out 'Clubs!' when I might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to her succor, which were the hope o' the Strand, where she was quartered. They fell on; I made good my place: at length they came to the broom-staff to me; I defied 'em still: when suddenly a file of boys behind 'em, loose shot, delivered such a shower of pebbles, that I was fain to draw mine honour in, and let 'em win the work: the devil was amongst 'em, I think, surely.
These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse, and fight for bitten apples; that no audience, but the tribulation of Tower-hill, or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days; besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.
Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here! They grow still too; from all parts they are coming, As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters, These lazy knaves? Ye have made a fine hand, fellows: There's a trim rabble let in: are all these Your faithful friends o' the suburbs? We shall have Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies, When they pass back from the christening.
An't please your honour, We are but men; and what so many may do, Not being torn a-pieces, we have done: An army cannot rule 'em.
As I live, If the king blame me for't, I'll lay ye all By the heels, and suddenly; and on your heads Clap round fines for neglect: ye are lazy knaves; And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when Ye should do service. Hark! the trumpets sound; They're come already from the christening: Go, break among the press, and find a way out To let the troop pass fairly; or I'll find A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Make way there for the princess.
You great fellow,Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.
You i' the camlet, get up o' the rail;I'll peck you o'er the pales else.
Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperouslife, long, and ever happy, to the high and mightyprincess of England, Elizabeth!
[Kneeling] And to your royal grace, and the good queen, My noble partners, and myself, thus pray: All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady, Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy, May hourly fall upon ye!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thank you, good lord archbishop:What is her name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up, lord.
With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!Into whose hand I give thy life.
Amen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My noble gossips, ye have been too prodigal:I thank ye heartily; so shall this lady,When she has so much English.
Let me speak, sir, For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth. This royal infant—heaven still move about her!— Though in her cradle, yet now promises Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings, Which time shall bring to ripeness: she shall be— But few now living can behold that goodness— A pattern to all princes living with her, And all that shall succeed: Saba was never More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue Than this pure soul shall be: all princely graces, That mould up such a mighty piece as this is, With all the virtues that attend the good, Shall still be doubled on her: truth shall nurse her, Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her: She shall be loved and fear'd: her own shall bless her; Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn, And hang their heads with sorrow: good grows with her: In her days every man shall eat in safety, Under his own vine, what he plants; and sing The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours: God shall be truly known; and those about her From her shall read the perfect ways of honour, And by those claim their greatness, not by blood. Nor shall this peace sleep with her: but as when The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix, Her ashes new create another heir, As great in admiration as herself; So shall she leave her blessedness to one, When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness, Who from the sacred ashes of her honour Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was, And so stand fix'd: peace, plenty, love, truth, terror, That were the servants to this chosen infant, Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him: Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine, His honour and the greatness of his name Shall be, and make new nations: he shall flourish, And, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches To all the plains about him: our children's children Shall see this, and bless heaven.
Thou speakest wonders.
She shall be, to the happiness of England, An aged princess; many days shall see her, And yet no day without a deed to crown it. Would I had known no more! but she must die, She must, the saints must have her; yet a virgin, A most unspotted lily shall she pass To the ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
O lord archbishop, Thou hast made me now a man! never, before This happy child, did I get any thing: This oracle of comfort has so pleased me, That when I am in heaven I shall desire To see what this child does, and praise my Maker. I thank ye all. To you, my good lord mayor, And your good brethren, I am much beholding; I have received much honour by your presence, And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords: Ye must all see the queen, and she must thank ye, She will be sick else. This day, no man think Has business at his house; for all shall stay: This little one shall make it holiday.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis ten to one this play can never please All that are here: some come to take their ease, And sleep an act or two; but those, we fear, We have frighted with our trumpets; so, 'tis clear, They'll say 'tis naught: others, to hear the city Abused extremely, and to cry 'That's witty!' Which we have not done neither: that, I fear, All the expected good we're like to hear For this play at this time, is only in The merciful construction of good women; For such a one we show'd 'em: if they smile, And say 'twill do, I know, within a while All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap, If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.
Hence! Home, you idle creatures get you home! Is this a holiday? What, know you not, Being mechanical, you ought not walk Upon a laboring day without the sign Of your profession? —Speak, what trade art thou?
Why, sir, a carpenter.
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule? What dost thou with thy best apparel on? —You, sir, what trade are you?
Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as you would say, a cobbler.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?
Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me. Yet, if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
What mean’st thou by that? “Mend” me, thou saucy fellow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, sir, cobble you.
Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl. I meddle with no tradesman’s matters nor women’s matters, but withal I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes. When they are in great danger, I recover them. As propermen as ever trod upon neat’s leather have gone upon my handiwork.
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself into more work. But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home? What tributaries follow him to Rome To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things, O you hard hearts, you cruèl men of Rome, Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft Have you climbed up to walls and battlements, To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops, Your infants in your arms, and there have sat The livelong day with patient expectation To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome. And when you saw his chariot but appear, Have you not made an universal shout That Tiber trembled underneath her banks To hear the replication of your sounds Made in her concave shores? And do you now put on your best attire? And do you now cull out a holiday? And do you now strew flowers in his way That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood? Be gone! Run to your houses, fall upon your knees, Pray to the gods to intermit the plague That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault, Assemble all the poor men of your sort, Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears Into the channel till the lowest stream Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
See whether their basest metal be not moved. They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. Go you down that way towards the Capitol. This way will I. Disrobe the images If you do find them decked with ceremonies.
May we do so?You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
It is no matter. Let no images Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about And drive away the vulgar from the streets. So do you too, where you perceive them thick. These growing feathers plucked from Caesar’s wing Will make him fly an ordinary pitch, Who else would soar above the view of men And keep us all in servile fearfulness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Calphurnia!
Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
Calphurnia!
Here, my lord.
Stand you directly in Antonius' way When he doth run his course. —Antonius!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar, my lord.
Forget not in your speed, Antonius, To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say The barren, touchèd in this holy chase, Shake off their sterile curse.
I shall remember.When Caesar says, “do this,” it is performed.
Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
Caesar!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha! Who calls?
Bid every noise be still. Peace yet again.
Who is it in the press that calls on me? I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, Cry “Caesar!” —Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.
Beware the ides of March.
What man is that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.
Set him before me. Let me see his face.
Fellow, come from the throng. Look upon Caesar.
What sayst thou to me now? Speak once again.
Beware the ides of March.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass!
Will you go see the order of the course?
Not I.
I pray you, do.
I am not gamesome. I do lack some part Of that quick spirit that is in Antony. Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires. I’ll leave you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brutus, I do observe you now of late I have not from your eyes that gentleness And show of love as I was wont to have. You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand Over your friend that loves you.
Cassius, Be not deceived. If I have veiled my look, I turn the trouble of my countenance Merely upon myself. Vexèd I am Of late with passions of some difference, Conceptions only proper to myself, Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors. But let not therefore, my good friends, be grieved— Among which number, Cassius, be you one— Nor construe any further my neglect Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war, Forgets the shows of love to other men.
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion, By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations. Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itselfBut by reflection, by some other things.
'Tis just. And it is very much lamented, Brutus, That you have no such mirrors as will turn Your hidden worthiness into your eye That you might see your shadow . I have heard Where many of the best respect in Rome, Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus And groaning underneath this age’s yoke, Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,That you would have me seek into myselfFor that which is not in me?
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear. And since you know you cannot see yourself So well as by reflection, I, your glass, Will modestly discover to yourself That of yourself which you yet know not of. And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus. Were I a common laugher, or did use To stale with ordinary oaths my love To every new protester, if you know That I do fawn on men and hug them hard And, after, scandal them, or if you know That I profess myself in banqueting To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
What means this shouting? I do fear, the peopleChoose Caesar for their king.
Ay, do you fear it?Then must I think you would not have it so.
I would not, Cassius. Yet I love him well. But wherefore do you hold me here so long? What is it that you would impart to me? If it be aught toward the general good, Set honor in one eye and death i' th' other, And I will look on both indifferently, For let the gods so speed me as I love The name of honor more than I fear death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus, As well as I do know your outward favor. Well, honor is the subject of my story. I cannot tell what you and other men Think of this life, but, for my single self, I had as lief not be as live to be In awe of such a thing as I myself. I was born free as Caesar. So were you. We both have fed as well, and we can both Endure the winter’s cold as well as he. For once upon a raw and gusty day, The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores, Caesar said to me, “Darest thou, Cassius, now Leap in with me into this angry flood And swim to yonder point?” Upon the word, Accoutred as I was, I plungèd in And bade him follow. So indeed he did. The torrent roared, and we did buffet it With lusty sinews, throwing it aside And stemming it with hearts of controversy. But ere we could arrive the point proposed, Caesar cried, “Help me, Cassius, or I sink!” I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor, Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber Did I the tired Caesar. And this man Is now become a god, and Cassius is A wretched creature and must bend his body If Caesar carelessly but nod on him. He had a fever when he was in Spain, And when the fit was on him, I did mark How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake! His coward lips did from their color fly, And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan, Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans Mark him and write his speeches in their books— “Alas,” it cried, “give me some drink, Titinius,” As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me A man of such a feeble temper should So get the start of the majestic world And bear the palm alone.
Another general shout!I do believe that these applauses areFor some new honors that are heaped on Caesar.
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world Like a Colossus, and we petty men Walk under his huge legs and peep about To find ourselves dishonorable graves. Men at some time are masters of their fates. The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars But in ourselves, that we are underlings. Brutus and Caesar—what should be in that “Caesar?” Why should that name be sounded more than yours? Write them together, yours is as fair a name. Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well. Weigh them, it is as heavy. Conjure with 'em, “Brutus” will start a spirit as soon as “Caesar.” Now in the names of all the gods at once, Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed! Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods! When went there by an age, since the great flood, But it was famed with more than with one man? When could they say till now, that talked of Rome, That her wide walks encompassed but one man? Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough, When there is in it but one only man. Oh, you and I have heard our fathers say, There was a Brutus once that would have brooked Th' eternal devil to keep his state in Rome As easily as a king.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous. What you would work me to, I have some aim. How I have thought of this and of these times I shall recount hereafter. For this present, I would not, so with love I might entreat you, Be any further moved. What you have said I will consider, what you have to say I will with patience hear, and find a time Both meet to hear and answer such high things. Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a son of Rome Under these hard conditions as this time Is like to lay upon us.
I am glad that my weak wordsHave struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The games are done and Caesar is returning.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,And he will, after his sour fashion, tell youWhat hath proceeded worthy note today.
I will do so. But, look you, Cassius, The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow, And all the rest look like a chidden train. Calphurnia’s cheek is pale, and Cicero Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes As we have seen him in the Capitol Being crossed in conference by some senators.
Casca will tell us what the matter is.
Antonio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar.
[aside to ANTONY] Let me have men about me that are fat, Sleek-headed men and such as sleep a-nights. Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look. He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.
[aside to CAESAR] Fear him not, Caesar. He’s not dangerous.He is a noble Roman and well given.
[aside to ANTONY] Would he were fatter! But I fear him not. Yet if my name were liable to fear, I do not know the man I should avoid So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much. He is a great observer, and he looks Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays, As thou dost, Antony . He hears no music. Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit That could be moved to smile at anything. Such men as he be never at heart’s ease Whiles they behold a greater than themselves, And therefore are they very dangerous. I rather tell thee what is to be feared Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar. Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf, And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.
[to BRUTUS] You pulled me by the cloak. Would you speak with me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, Casca. Tell us what hath chanced todayThat Caesar looks so sad.
Why, you were with him, were you not?
I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
Why, there was a crown offered him; and, being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.
What was the second noise for?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, for that too.
They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
Why, for that too.
Was the crown offered him thrice?
Ay, marry, was ’t, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than other, and at every putting-by mine honest neighbors shouted.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who offered him the crown?
Why, Antony.
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it. It was mere foolery. I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown (yet ’twas not a crown neither, ’twas one of these coronets) and, as I told you, he put it by once—but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it . Then he offered it to him again, then he put it by again—but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it the third time. He put it the third time by. And still, as he refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopp'd hands and threw up their sweaty night-caps and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked Caesar—for he swooned and fell down at it. And for mine own part, Idurst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air.
But soft, I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He fell down in the marketplace, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.
'Tis very like. He hath the falling sickness.
No, Caesar hath it not. But you and IAnd honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him according as he pleased and displeased them, asthey use to do the players in the theatre, I am no trueman.
What said he when he came unto himself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked meope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut. An I had been a man of any occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so he fell. When he came to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss, he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four wenches where I stood cried, “Alas, good soul!” and forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no heed to be taken of them. If Caesar had stabbed their mothers they would have done no less.
And after that he came thus sad away?
Ay.
Did Cicero say anything?
Ay, he spoke Greek.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To what effect?
Nay, an I tell you that, I’ll ne'er look you i' th' face again. But those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. But, for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more news too. Murellus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar’s images, are put to silence. Fare you well. There was more foolery yet, if I could remember it.
Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
No, I am promised forth.
Will you dine with me tomorrow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating.
Good. I will expect you.
Do so. Farewell both.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!He was quick mettle when he went to school.
So is he now in execution Of any bold or noble enterprise, However he puts on this tardy form. This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, Which gives men stomach to digest his words With better appetite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And so it is. For this time I will leave you. Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me, I will come home to you. Or, if you will, Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
Well, Brutus, thou art noble. Yet I see Thy honorable mettle may be wrought From that it is disposed. Therefore it is meet That noble minds keep ever with their likes, For who so firm that cannot be seduced? Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus. If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius, He should not humor me. I will this night, In several hands, in at his windows throw, As if they came from several citizens, Writings all tending to the great opinion That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely Caesar’s ambition shall be glancèd at. And after this let Caesar seat him sure, For we will shake him, or worse days endure.
Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?Why are you breathless? And why stare you so?
Are not you moved when all the sway of earth Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero, I have seen tempests when the scolding winds Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen Th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam To be exalted with the threatening clouds, But never till tonight, never till now, Did I go through a tempest dropping fire. Either there is a civil strife in heaven, Or else the world, too saucy with the gods, Incenses them to send destruction.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
A common slave—you know him well by sight— Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn Like twenty torches joined, and yet his hand, Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched. Besides—I ha' not since put up my sword— Against the Capitol I met a lion, Who glaz'd upon me and went surly by, Without annoying me. And there were drawn Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, Transformèd with their fear, who swore they saw Men all in fire walk up and down the streets. And yesterday the bird of night did sit Even at noon-day upon the marketplace, Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies Do so conjointly meet, let not men say, “These are their reasons; they are natural.” For I believe they are portentous things Unto the climate that they point upon.
Indeed, it is a strange-disposèd time. But men may construe things after their fashion, Clean from the purpose of the things themselves. Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
He doth, for he did bid AntoniusSend word to you he would be there tomorrow.
Good night then, Casca. This disturbèd skyIs not to walk in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, Cicero.
Who’s there?
A Roman.
Casca, by your voice.
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A very pleasing night to honest men.
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
Those that have known the earth so full of faults. For my part, I have walked about the streets, Submitting me unto the perilous night, And, thus unbracèd, Casca, as you see, Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone. And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open The breast of heaven, I did present myself Even in the aim and very flash of it.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?It is the part of men to fear and trembleWhen the most mighty gods by tokens sendSuch dreadful heralds to astonish us.
You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life That should be in a Roman you do want, Or else you use not. You look pale, and gaze, And put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder To see the strange impatience of the heavens. But if you would consider the true cause Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts, Why birds and beasts from quality and kind, Why old men fool and children calculate, Why all these things change from their ordinance Their natures and preformèd faculties To monstrous quality— why, you shall find That heaven hath infused them with these spirits To make them instruments of fear and warning Unto some monstrous state. Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man Most like this dreadful night, That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars As doth the lion in the Capitol— A man no mightier than thyself or me In personal action, yet prodigious grown, And fearful as these strange eruptions are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis Caesar that you mean. Is it not, Cassius?
Let it be who it is. For Romans now Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors, But—woe the while!—our fathers' minds are dead, And we are governed with our mothers' spirits. Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
Indeed, they say the senators tomorrowMean to establish Caesar as a king,And he shall wear his crown by sea and landIn every place save here in Italy.
I know where I will wear this dagger then. Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius. Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong. Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat. Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass, Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron Can be retentive to the strength of spirit. But life, being weary of these worldly bars, Never lacks power to dismiss itself. If I know this, know all the world besides, That part of tyranny that I do bear I can shake off at pleasure.
So can I.So every bondman in his own hand bearsThe power to cancel his captivity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And why should Caesar be a tyrant then? Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf But that he sees the Romans are but sheep. He were no lion were not Romans hinds. Those that with haste will make a mighty fire Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome, What rubbish and what offal, when it serves For the base matter to illuminate So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief, Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this Before a willing bondman. Then I know My answer must be made. But I am armed, And dangers are to me indifferent.
You speak to Casca, and to such a manThat is no fleering telltale. Hold, my hand.Be factious for redress of all these griefs,And I will set this foot of mine as farAs who goes farthest.
There’s a bargain made. Now know you, Casca, I have moved already Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans To undergo with me an enterprise Of honorable-dangerous consequence. And I do know by this they stay for me In Pompey’s porch. For now, this fearful night, There is no stir or walking in the streets, And the complexion of the element In favor’s like the work we have in hand, Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
'Tis Cinna. I do know him by his gait. He is a friend. —Cinna, where haste you so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?
No, it is Casca, one incorporateTo our attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?
I am glad on ’t. What a fearful night is this!There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.
Am I not stayed for? Tell me.
Yes, you are.O Cassius, if you couldBut win the noble Brutus to our party—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper, And look you lay it in the praetor’s chair Where Brutus may but find it. And throw this In at his window. Set this up with wax Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done, Repair to Pompey’s porch, where you shall find us. Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s goneTo seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
That done, repair to Pompey’s theatre.
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him Is ours already, and the man entire Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
Oh, he sits high in all the people’s hearts, And that which would appear offense in us, His countenance, like richest alchemy, Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Him and his worth and our great need of him You have right well conceited. Let us go, For it is after midnight, and ere day We will awake him and be sure of him.
What, Lucius, ho!— I cannot by the progress of the stars Give guess how near to day . —Lucius, I say!— I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.— When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!
Called you, my lord?
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.When it is lighted, come and call me here.
I will, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be by his death, and for my part I know no personal cause to spurn at him But for the general. He would be crowned. How that might change his nature, there’s the question. It is the bright day that brings forth the adder And that craves wary walking. Crown him that, And then I grant we put a sting in him That at his will he may do danger with. Th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins Remorse from power. And, to speak truth of Caesar, I have not known when his affections swayed More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder, Whereto the climber upward turns his face. But when he once attains the upmost round, He then unto the ladder turns his back, Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees By which he did ascend. So Caesar may. Then, lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel Will bear no color for the thing he is, Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented, Would run to these and these extremities. And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg— Which, hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous— And kill him in the shell.
The taper burneth in your closet, sir. Searching the window for a flint, I found This paper, thus sealed up, and I am sure It did not lie there when I went to bed. [gives him a letter]
Get you to bed again. It is not day.Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
I know not, sir.
Look in the calendar and bring me word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will, sir.
The exhalations whizzing in the air Give so much light that I may read by them. [opens the letter and reads] “Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake, and see thyself. Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!” “Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake.” Such instigations have been often dropped Where I have took them up. —“Shall Rome, etc.” Thus must I piece it out: “Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe?” What, Rome? My ancestors did from the streets of Rome The Tarquin drive when he was called a king. —“Speak, strike, redress!” Am I entreated To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise, If the redress will follow, thou receivest Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!
Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
'Tis good. Go to the gate. Somebody knocks.
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar, I have not slept. Between the acting of a dreadful thing And the first motion, all the interim is Like a phantasma or a hideous dream. The genius and the mortal instruments Are then in council, and the state of man, Like to a little kingdom, suffers then The nature of an insurrection.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,Who doth desire to see you.
Is he alone?
No, sir, there are more with him.
Do you know them?
No, sir. Their hats are plucked about their ears, And half their faces buried in their cloaks, That by no means I may discover them By any mark of favor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let 'em enter.
They are the faction. O conspiracy, Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night When evils are most free? O, then by day Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy. Hide it in smiles and affability. For if thou path, thy native semblance on, Not Erebus itself were dim enough To hide thee from prevention.
I think we are too bold upon your rest.Good morrow, Brutus. Do we trouble you?
I have been up this hour, awake all night.Know I these men that come along with you?
Yes, every man of them, and no man here But honors you, and every one doth wish You had but that opinion of yourself Which every noble Roman bears of you. This is Trebonius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is welcome hither.
This, Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.
This, Casca. This, Cinna. And this, Metellus Cimber.
They are all welcome.What watchful cares do interpose themselvesBetwixt your eyes and night?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I entreat a word?
Here lies the east. Doth not the day break here?
No.
O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon gray linesThat fret the clouds are messengers of day.
You shall confess that you are both deceived. [points his sword] Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises, Which is a great way growing on the south, Weighing the youthful season of the year. Some two months hence up higher toward the north He first presents his fire, and the high east Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][comes forward with CASSIUS] Give me your hands all over, one by one. [shakes their hands]
And let us swear our resolution.
No, not an oath. If not the face of men, The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse— If these be motives weak, break off betimes, And every man hence to his idle bed. So let high-sighted tyranny range on Till each man drop by lottery. But if these— As I am sure they do—bear fire enough To kindle cowards and to steel with valor The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen, W hat need we any spur but our own cause To prick us to redress? What other bond Than secret Romans that have spoke the word And will not palter? And what other oath Than honesty to honesty engaged, That this shall be, or we will fall for it? Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous, Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls That welcome wrongs. Unto bad causes swear Such creatures as men doubt. But do not stain The even virtue of our enterprise, Nor th' insuppressive mettle of our spirits, To think that or our cause or our performance Did need an oath, when every drop of blood That every Roman bears—and nobly bears— Is guilty of a several bastardy If he do break the smallest particle Of any promise that hath passed from him.
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?I think he will stand very strong with us.
Let us not leave him out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by no means.
O, let us have him, for his silver hairs Will purchase us a good opinion And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds. It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands. Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear, But all be buried in his gravity.
O, name him not. Let us not break with him, For he will never follow anything That other men begin.
Then leave him out.
Indeed he is not fit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall no man else be touched but only Caesar?
Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar, Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him A shrewd contriver. And, you know, his means, If he improve them, may well stretch so far As to annoy us all; which to prevent, Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius, To cut the head off and then hack the limbs, Like wrath in death and envy afterwards, For Antony is but a limb of Caesar. Let us be sacrificers but not butchers, Caius. We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar, And in the spirit of men there is no blood. Oh, that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit And not dismember Caesar! But, alas, Caesar must bleed for it. And, gentle friends, Let’s kill him boldly but not wrathfully. Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods, Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds. And let our hearts, as subtle masters do, Stir up their servants to an act of rage And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make Our purpose necessary and not envious, Which so appearing to the common eyes, We shall be called purgers, not murderers. And for Mark Antony, think not of him, For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm When Caesar’s head is off.
Yet I fear him.For in the engrafted love he bears to Caesar—
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him. If he love Caesar, all that he can do Is to himself: take thought and die for Caesar. And that were much he should, for he is given To sports, to wildness and much company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is no fear in him. Let him not die,For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
Peace! Count the clock.
The clock hath stricken three.
'Tis time to part.
But it is doubtful yet Whether Caesar will come forth today or no. For he is superstitious grown of late, Quite from the main opinion he held once Of fantasy, of dreams and ceremonies. It may be, these apparent prodigies, The unaccustomed terror of this night, And the persuasion of his augurers May hold him from the Capitol today.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never fear that. If he be so resolved, I can o'ersway him. For he loves to hear That unicorns may be betrayed with trees, And bears with glasses, elephants with holes, Lions with toils, and men with flatterers. But when I tell him he hates flatterers, He says he does, being then most flatterèd. Let me work. For I can give his humor the true bent, And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
By the eighth hour. Is that the uttermost?
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard , Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey. I wonder none of you have thought of him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, good Metellus, go along by him.He loves me well, and I have given him reasons.Send him but hither and I’ll fashion him.
The morning comes upon ’s. We’ll leave you, Brutus.—And, friends, disperse yourselves. But all rememberWhat you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily. Let not our looks put on our purposes, But bear it as our Roman actors do, With untired spirits and formal constancy. And so good morrow to you every one.
Boy! Lucius!—Fast asleep? It is no matter. Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber. Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies, Which busy care draws in the brains of men. Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.
Brutus, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?It is not for your health thus to commitYour weak condition to the raw, cold morning.
Nor for yours neither. Y' have ungently, Brutus, Stole from my bed. And yesternight, at supper, You suddenly arose and walked about, Musing and sighing, with your arms across, And when I asked you what the matter was, You stared upon me with ungentle looks. I urged you further, then you scratched your head And too impatiently stamped with your foot. Yet I insisted; yet you answered not, But with an angry wafture of your hand Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did, Fearing to strengthen that impatience Which seemed too much enkindled, and withal Hoping it was but an effect of humor, Which sometime hath his hour with every man. It will not let you eat nor talk nor sleep, And could it work so much upon your shape As it hath much prevailed on your condition, I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord, Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
I am not well in health, and that is all.
Brutus is wise, and were he not in health,He would embrace the means to come by it.
Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Brutus sick? And is it physical To walk unbracèd and suck up the humors Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick, And will he steal out of his wholesome bed, To dare the vile contagion of the night And tempt the rheumy and unpurgèd air To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus. You have some sick offense within your mind, Which by the right and virtue of my place I ought to know of. [kneels] And upon my knees I charm you, by my once-commended beauty, By all your vows of love and that great vow Which did incorporate and make us one That you unfold to me, your self, your half, Why you are heavy, and what men tonight Have had to resort to you. For here have been Some six or seven who did hide their faces Even from darkness.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.
[rising] I should not need if you were gentle, Brutus. Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus, Is it excepted I should know no secrets That appertain to you? Am I yourself But, as it were, in sort or limitation, To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed, And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs Of your good pleasure? If it be no more, Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
You are my true and honorable wife,As dear to me as are the ruddy dropsThat visit my sad heart.
If this were true, then should I know this secret. I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife. I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman well-reputed, Cato’s daughter. Think you I am no stronger than my sex, Being so fathered and so husbanded? Tell me your counsels. I will not disclose 'em. I have made strong proof of my constancy, Giving myself a voluntary wound Here in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience, And not my husband’s secrets?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O ye gods,Render me worthy of this noble wife!
Hark, hark! One knocks. Portia, go in awhile. And by and by thy bosom shall partake The secrets of my heart. All my engagements I will construe to thee, All the charactery of my sad brows. Leave me with haste.
Lucius, who’s that knocking?
He is a sick man that would speak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of. — Boy, stand aside. —Caius Ligarius, how?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius, To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
I am not sick if Brutus have in hand Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
[removes his kerchief] By all the gods that Romans bow before, I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome, Brave son derived from honorable loins, Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up My mortifièd spirit. Now bid me run, And I will strive with things impossible, Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
But are not some whole that we must make sick?
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,I shall unfold to thee as we are goingTo whom it must be done.
Set on your foot, And with a heart new-fired I follow you, To do I know not what. But it sufficeth That Brutus leads me on.
Follow me, then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight. Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out, “Help, ho! They murder Caesar!” —Who’s within?
My lord.
Go bid the priests do present sacrificeAnd bring me their opinions of success.
I will, my lord.
What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?You shall not stir out of your house today.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me Ne'er looked but on my back. When they shall see The face of Caesar, they are vanishèd.
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies, Yet now they fright me. There is one within, Besides the things that we have heard and seen, Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. A lioness hath whelpèd in the streets, And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead. Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds In ranks and squadrons and right form of war, Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol. The noise of battle hurtled in the air. Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan, And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets. O Caesar! These things are beyond all use, And I do fear them.
What can be avoided Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
When beggars die there are no comets seen.The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
Cowards die many times before their deaths. The valiant never taste of death but once. Of all the wonders that I yet have heard, It seems to me most strange that men should fear, Seeing that death, a necessary end, Will come when it will come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say the augurers?
They would not have you to stir forth today.Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,They could not find a heart within the beast.
The gods do this in shame of cowardice. Caesar should be a beast without a heart If he should stay at home today for fear. No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well That Caesar is more dangerous than he. We are two lions littered in one day, And I the elder and more terrible. And Caesar shall go forth.
Alas, my lord, Your wisdom is consumed in confidence. Do not go forth today. Call it my fear That keeps you in the house, and not your own. We’ll send Mark Antony to the senate house, And he shall say you are not well today. [kneels] Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,And for thy humor I will stay at home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here’s Decius Brutus. He shall tell them so.
Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar.I come to fetch you to the senate house.
And you are come in very happy time To bear my greeting to the senators And tell them that I will not come today. “Cannot” is false, and that I dare not, falser. I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
Say he is sick.
Shall Caesar send a lie?Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so farTo be afraid to tell graybeards the truth? Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so.
The cause is in my will. I will not come. That is enough to satisfy the senate. But for your private satisfaction, Because I love you, I will let you know. Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home. She dreamt tonight she saw my statue, Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, Did run pure blood. And many lusty Romans Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it. And these does she apply for warnings and portents And evils imminent, and on her knee Hath begged that I will stay at home today.
This dream is all amiss interpreted. It was a vision fair and fortunate. Your statue spouting blood in many pipes, In which so many smiling Romans bathed, Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck Reviving blood, and that great men shall press For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance. This by Calphurnia’s dream is signified.
And this way have you well expounded it.
I have, when you have heard what I can say. And know it now: the senate have concluded To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar. If you shall send them word you will not come, Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock Apt to be rendered for someone to say, “Break up the senate till another time When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.” If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper, “Lo, Caesar is afraid?” Pardon me, Caesar. For my dear, dear love To your proceeding bids me tell you this, And reason to my love is liable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!I am ashamèd I did yield to them.Give me my robe, for I will go.
And look, where Publius is come to fetch me.
Good morrow, Caesar.
Welcome, Publius. —What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too? —Good morrow, Casca. —Caius Ligarius, Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy As that same ague which hath made you lean. —What is ’t o'clock?
Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you for your pains and courtesy.
See, Antony, that revels long a-nights, Is notwithstanding up. —Good morrow, Antony.
So to most noble Caesar.
Bid them prepare within. I am to blame to be thus waited for. —Now, Cinna. —Now, Metellus. —What, Trebonius, I have an hour’s talk in store for you. Remember that you call on me today. Be near me, that I may remember you.
Caesar, I will. [aside] And so near will I be That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me.And we, like friends, will straightway go together.
[aside] That every “like” is not the same, O Caesar,The heart of Brutus earns to think upon.
[reads aloud] “Caesar, beware of Brutus. Take heed of Cassius. Come not near Casca. Have an eye to Cinna. Trust not Trebonius. Mark well Metellus Cimber. Decius Brutus loves thee not. Thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent againstCaesar. If thou beest not immortal, look about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods defendthee! Thy lover, Artemidorus” Here will I stand till Caesar pass along, And as a suitor will I give him this. My heart laments that virtue cannot live Out of the teeth of emulation. If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayst live. If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
I prithee, boy, run to the senate house.Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.Why dost thou stay?
To know my errand, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would have had thee there and here again Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there. —O constancy, be strong upon my side, Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue! I have a man’s mind but a woman’s might. How hard it is for women to keep counsel! —Art thou here yet?
Madam, what should I do?Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?And so return to you, and nothing else?
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, For he went sickly forth. And take good note What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him. Hark, boy! What noise is that?
I hear none, madam.
Prithee, listen well.I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
Come hither, fellow. Which way hast thou been?
At mine own house, good lady.
What is ’t o'clock?
About the ninth hour, lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Madam, not yet. I go to take my standTo see him pass on to the Capitol.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar To be so good to Caesar as to hear me, I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
Why, know’st thou any harm’s intended towards him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None that I know will be; much that I fear may chance. Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow. The throng that follows Caesar at the heels, Of senators, of praetors, common suitors, Will crowd a feeble man almost to death. I’ll get me to a place more void, and there Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.
I must go in. [aside] Ay me, how weak a thing The heart of woman is! O Brutus, The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! Sure, the boy heard me. [to LUCIUS] Brutus hath a suit That Caesar will not grant.—Oh, I grow faint.— Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord. Say I am merry. Come to me again, And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
[to the SOOTHSAYER] The ides of March are come.
Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
[offering his letter] Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][offering CAESAR another paper] Trebonius doth desire you to o'er-read,At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
O Caesar, read mine first, for mine’s a suitThat touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Delay not, Caesar. Read it instantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ARTEMIDORUS] Sirrah, give place.
[to ARTEMIDORUS] What, urge you your petitions in the street?Come to the Capitol.
[to CASSIUS] I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
What enterprise, Popillius?
Fare you well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to CASSIUS] What said Popillius Lena?
[aside to BRUTUS] He wished today our enterprise might thrive.I fear our purpose is discoverèd.
Look how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention —Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known, Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back, For I will slay myself.
Cassius, be constant.Popillius Lena speaks not of our purposes.For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Trebonius knows his time. For, look you, Brutus.He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him goAnd presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
He is addressed. Press near and second him.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
Are we all ready? What is now amissThat Caesar and his senate must redress?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][kneeling] Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,Metellus Cimber throws before thy seatAn humble heart—
I must prevent thee, Cimber. These couchings and these lowly courtesies Might fire the blood of ordinary men And turn preordinance and first decree Into the law of children. Be not fond, To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood That will be thawed from the true quality With that which melteth fools —I mean, sweet words, Low-crookèd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning. Thy brother by decree is banishèd. If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him, I spurn thee like a cur out of my way. Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause Will he be satisfied.
Is there no voice more worthy than my ownTo sound more sweetly in great Caesar’s earFor the repealing of my banished brother?
[kneeling] I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,Desiring thee that Publius Cimber mayHave an immediate freedom of repeal.
What, Brutus?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][kneeling] Pardon, Caesar. Caesar, pardon.As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fallTo beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
I could be well moved if I were as you. If I could pray to move, prayers would move me. But I am constant as the northern star, Of whose true-fixed and resting quality There is no fellow in the firmament. The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks. They are all fire and every one doth shine, But there’s but one in all doth hold his place. So in the world. 'Tis furnished well with men, And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive, Yet in the number I do know but one That unassailable holds on his rank, Unshaked of motion . And that I am he Let me a little show it even in this: That I was constant Cimber should be banished, And constant do remain to keep him so.
[kneeling] O Caesar—
Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
[kneeling] Great Caesar—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
Speak, hands, for me!
Et tu, Bruté? —Then fall, Caesar. [dies]
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
Some to the common pulpits, and cry out,“Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]People and senators, be not affrighted.Fly not. Stand still. Ambition’s debt is paid.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
And Cassius too.
Where’s Publius?
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar’sShould chance—
Talk not of standing. —Publius, good cheer. There is no harm intended to your person, Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
Do so. And let no man abide this deedBut we the doers.
Where is Antony?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fled to his house amazed.Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and runAs it were doomsday.
Fates, we will know your pleasures. That we shall die, we know. 'Tis but the time, And drawing days out, that men stand upon.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of lifeCuts off so many years of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit. So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridged His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop, And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords. Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace, And waving our red weapons o'er our heads Let’s all cry, “Peace, freedom, and liberty!”
Stoop, then, and wash.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How many ages henceShall this our lofty scene be acted overIn states unborn and accents yet unknown!
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,That now on Pompey’s basis lies alongNo worthier than the dust!
So oft as that shall be,So often shall the knot of us be called“The men that gave their country liberty.”
What, shall we forth?
Ay, every man away.Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heelsWith the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soft! Who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.
[kneeling] Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel. [falls prostrate] Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down, And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say: Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest. Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. Say I love Brutus, and I honor him. Say I feared Caesar, honored him, and loved him. If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony May safely come to him and be resolved How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death, Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead So well as Brutus living , but will follow The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus Thorough the hazards of this untrod state With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman. I never thought him worse. Tell him, so please him come unto this place, He shall be satisfied and, by my honor, Depart untouched.
[rising] I’ll fetch him presently.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I wish we may. But yet have I a mind That fears him much, and my misgiving still Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
But here comes Antony.—Welcome, Mark Antony.
O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low? Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils, Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well. —I know not, gentlemen, what you intend, Who else must be let blood, who else is rank. If I myself, there is no hour so fit As Caesar’s death’s hour, nor no instrument Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich With the most noble blood of all this world. I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard, Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke, Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die. No place will please me so, no mean of death, As here by Caesar, and by you cut off, The choice and master spirits of this age.
O Antony, beg not your death of us. Though now we must appear bloody and cruel— As by our hands and this our present act You see we do —yet see you but our hands And this the bleeding business they have done. Our hearts you see not. They are pitiful. And pity to the general wrong of Rome— As fire drives out fire, so pity pity— Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part, To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony. Our arms in strength of malice and our hearts Of brothers' temper do receive you in With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man’sIn the disposing of new dignities.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Only be patient till we have appeased The multitude, beside themselves with fear, And then we will deliver you the cause, Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him, Have thus proceeded.
I doubt not of your wisdom. Let each man render me his bloody hand. [shakes hands with the conspirators] First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you. —Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand. —Now, Decius Brutus, yours. —Now yours, Metellus. —Yours, Cinna. —And, my valiant Casca, yours. —Though last, not last in love, yours, good Trebonius. —Gentlemen all, alas, what shall I say? My credit now stands on such slippery ground That one of two bad ways you must conceit me, Either a coward or a flatterer —That I did love thee, Caesar, O, ’tis true. If then thy spirit look upon us now, Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death To see thy Antony making his peace, Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes— Most noble!—in the presence of thy corse? Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds, Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood, It would become me better than to close In terms of friendship with thine enemies. Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bayed, brave hart; Here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand, Signed in thy spoil, and crimsoned in thy lethe. O world, thou wast the forest to this hart, And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee. How like a deer, strucken by many princes, Dost thou here lie!
Mark Antony—
Pardon me, Caius Cassius.The enemies of Caesar shall say this;Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so. But what compact mean you to have with us? Will you be pricked in number of our friends? Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar. Friends am I with you all and love you all Upon this hope: that you shall give me reasons Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
Or else were this a savage spectacle! Our reasons are so full of good regard That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar, You should be satisfied.
That’s all I seek. And am moreover suitor that I may Produce his body to the marketplace, And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, Speak in the order of his funeral.
You shall, Mark Antony.
Brutus, a word with you . [aside to BRUTUS] You know not what you do. Do not consent That Antony speak in his funeral. Know you how much the people may be moved By that which he will utter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to CASSIUS] By your pardon. I will myself into the pulpit first, And show the reason of our Caesar’s death. What Antony shall speak, I will protest, He speaks by leave and by permission, And that we are contented Caesar shall Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies. It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
[aside to BRUTUS] I know not what may fall. I like it not.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar’s body. You shall not in your funeral speech blame us, But speak all good you can devise of Caesar, And say you do ’t by our permission. Else shall you not have any hand at all About his funeral. And you shall speak In the same pulpit whereto I am going, After my speech is ended.
Be it so.I do desire no more.
Prepare the body then, and follow us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth, That I am meek and gentle with these butchers! Thou art the ruins of the noblest man That ever livèd in the tide of times. Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood! Over thy wounds now do I prophesy— Which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby lips To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue— A curse shall light upon the limbs of men. Domestic fury and fierce civil strife Shall cumber all the parts of Italy. Blood and destruction shall be so in use, And dreadful objects so familiar, That mothers shall but smile when they behold Their infants quartered with the hands of war, All pity choked with custom of fell deeds, And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge, With Ate by his side come hot from hell, Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice Cry “Havoc!” and let slip the dogs of war, That this foul deed shall smell above the earth With carrion men, groaning for burial.
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
I do, Mark Antony.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his letters and is coming.And bid me say to you by word of mouth— [sees CAESAR’s body] O Caesar!—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy heart is big. Get thee apart and weep. Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes, Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine, Began to water. Is thy master coming?
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced. Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome, No Rome of safety for Octavius yet. Hie hence, and tell him so.—Yet, stay awhile. Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse Into the marketplace. There shall I try, In my oration, how the people take The cruèl issue of these bloody men. According to the which, thou shalt discourse To young Octavius of the state of things. Lend me your hand.
We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
Then follow me and give me audience, friends. —Cassius, go you into the other street And part the numbers. —Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here. Those that will follow Cassius, go with him, And public reasons shall be renderèd Of Caesar’s death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will hear Brutus speak.
I will hear Cassius and compare their reasonsWhen severally we hear them renderèd.
The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
Be patient till the last. Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause, and be silent that you mayhear. Believe me for mine honor, and have respect to mine honor that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses that you may the better judge. If there be any in this assembly, any dear friendof Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more. Had yourather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than thatCaesar were dead, to live all free men? As Caesar lovedme, I weep for him. As he was fortunate, I rejoice at it. As he was valiant, I honor him. But, as he was ambitious, I slew him. There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that would be a bondman? If any, speak—for him have I offended. Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak—for him have I offended. Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If any, speak—for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.
None, Brutus, none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol. His glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy, nor his offenses enforced for which he suffered death.
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying—a place in the commonwealth—as which of you shall not? With this I depart: that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the samedagger for myself when it shall please my country to need my death.
Live, Brutus! Live, live!
Bring him with triumph home unto his house!
Give him a statue with his ancestors!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him be Caesar!
Caesar’s better partsShall be crowned in Brutus!
We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and clamors.
My countrymen—
Peace, silence! Brutus speaks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, ho!
Good countrymen, let me depart alone. And, for my sake, stay here with Antony. Do grace to Caesar’s corpse, and grace his speech Tending to Caesar’s glories, which Mark Antony By our permission is allowed to make. I do entreat you, not a man depart, Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
Stay, ho! And let us hear Mark Antony.
Let him go up into the public chair. We’ll hear him. —Noble Antony, go up.
For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you. [ascends the pulpit]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What does he say of Brutus?
He says for Brutus' sakeHe finds himself beholding to us all.
'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
This Caesar was a tyrant.
Nay, that’s certain.We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
You gentle Romans—
Peace, ho! Let us hear him.
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him. The evil that men do lives after them; The good is oft interrèd with their bones. So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious. If it were so, it was a grievous fault, And grievously hath Caesar answered it. Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest— For Brutus is an honorable man; So are they all, all honorable men— Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral. He was my friend, faithful and just to me. But Brutus says he was ambitious, And Brutus is an honorable man. He hath brought many captives home to Rome Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill. Did this in Caesar seem ambitious? When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept. Ambition should be made of sterner stuff. Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, And Brutus is an honorable man. You all did see that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown, Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition? Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, And, sure, he is an honorable man. I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke, But here I am to speak what I do know. You all did love him once, not without cause. What cause withholds you then to mourn for him? O judgment! Thou art fled to brutish beasts, And men have lost their reason. Bear with me. My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, And I must pause till it come back to me. [weeps]
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If thou consider rightly of the matter,Caesar has had great wrong.
Has he, masters?I fear there will a worse come in his place.
Marked ye his words? He would not take the crown.Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
Poor soul! His eyes are red as fire with weeping.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
Now mark him. He begins again to speak.
But yesterday the word of Caesar might Have stood against the world. Now lies he there, And none so poor to do him reverence. O masters, if I were disposed to stir Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong— Who, you all know, are honorable men. I will not do them wrong. I rather choose To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you, Than I will wrong such honorable men. But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar. I found it in his closet. 'Tis his will. Let but the commons hear this testament— Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read— And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds And dip their napkins in his sacred blood, Yea, beg a hair of him for memory, And, dying, mention it within their wills, Bequeathing it as a rich legacy Unto their issue.
We’ll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony!
The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have patience, gentle friends. I must not read it. It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you. You are not wood, you are not stones, but men. And, being men, bearing the will of Caesar, It will inflame you, it will make you mad. 'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs. For, if you should—Oh, what would come of it!
Read the will. We’ll hear it, Antony.You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will.
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile? I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it. I fear I wrong the honorable men Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar. I do fear it.
They were traitors! “Honorable men”!
The will! The testament!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They were villains, murderers. The will! Read the will!
You will compel me, then, to read the will? Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar, And let me show you him that made the will. Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
Come down.
Descend.
You shall have leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A ring!Stand round.
Stand from the hearse. Stand from the body.
Room for Antony, most noble Antony!
Nay, press not so upon me. Stand far off.
Stand back. Room! Bear back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you have tears, prepare to shed them now. You all do know this mantle. I remember The first time ever Caesar put it on. 'Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent, That day he overcame the Nervii. Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through. See what a rent the envious Casca made. Through this the well-belovèd Brutus stabbed. And as he plucked his cursèd steel away, Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it, As rushing out of doors, to be resolved If Brutus so unkindly knocked, or no. For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel. Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him! This was the most unkindest cut of all. For when the noble Caesar saw him stab, Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms, Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart, And, in his mantle muffling up his face, Even at the base of Pompey’s statue, Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell. O, what a fall was there, my countrymen! Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, Whilst bloody treason flourished over us. Oh, now you weep, and, I perceive, you feel The dint of pity. These are gracious drops. Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here, Here is himself, marred, as you see, with traitors. [lifts up CAESAR's mantle]
O piteous spectacle!
O noble Caesar!
O woeful day!
O traitors, villains!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O most bloody sight!
We will be revenged.
Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill! Slay!Let not a traitor live!
Stay, countrymen.
Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We’ll hear him. We’ll follow him. We’ll die with him.
Good friends, sweet friends! Let me not stir you up To such a sudden flood of mutiny. They that have done this deed are honorable. What private griefs they have, alas, I know not, That made them do it. They are wise and honorable, And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you. I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts. I am no orator, as Brutus is, But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man That love my friend. And that they know full well That gave me public leave to speak of him. For I have neither wit nor words nor worth, Action nor utterance nor the power of speech, To stir men’s blood. I only speak right on. I tell you that which you yourselves do know, Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb mouths, And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus, And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue In every wound of Caesar that should move The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
We’ll mutiny.
We’ll burn the house of Brutus.
Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet hear me, countrymen. Yet hear me speak.
Peace, ho! Hear Antony. Most noble Antony!
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what. Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves? Alas, you know not. I must tell you then. You have forgot the will I told you of.
Most true. The will! Let’s stay and hear the will.
Here is the will, and under Caesar’s sealTo every Roman citizen he gives—To every several man—seventy-five drachmas.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.
O royal Caesar!
Hear me with patience.
Peace, ho!
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks, His private arbors and new-planted orchards, On this side Tiber. He hath left them you And to your heirs forever—common pleasures, To walk abroad and recreate yourselves. Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never, never.—Come, away, away!We’ll burn his body in the holy place,And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.Take up the body.
Go fetch fire.
Pluck down benches.
Pluck down forms, windows, anything.
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot.Take thou what course thou wilt!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, fellow?
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
Where is he?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.
And thither will I straight to visit him. He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry, And in this mood will give us anything.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I heard him say, Brutus and CassiusAre rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Belike they had some notice of the peopleHow I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar, And things unlucky charge my fantasy. I have no will to wander forth of doors, Yet something leads me forth.
What is your name?
Whither are you going?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man or a bachelor?
Answer every man directly.
Ay, and briefly.
Ay, and wisely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and truly, you were best.
What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly—wisely I say,I am a bachelor.
That’s as much as to say they are fools that marry. You’ll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.
Directly, I am going to Caesar’s funeral.
As a friend or an enemy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As a friend.
That matter is answered directly.
For your dwelling—briefly.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
Your name, sir, truly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, my name is Cinna.
Tear him to pieces. He’s a conspirator.
I am Cinna the poet. I am Cinna the poet.
Tear him for his bad verses! Tear him for his bad verses!
I am not Cinna the conspirator.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is no matter. His name’s Cinna. Pluck but his name out of his heart and turn him going.
Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho! Firebrands: to Brutus', to Cassius', burn all. Some to Decius' house and some to Casca’s. Some to Ligarius'. Away, go!
These many, then, shall die. Their names are pricked.
[to LEPIDUS] Your brother too must die. Consent you, Lepidus?
I do consent—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prick him down, Antony.
Upon condition Publius shall not live,Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.
He shall not live. Look, with a spot I damn him. But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house. Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine How to cut off some charge in legacies.
What, shall I find you here?
Or here, or at the Capitol.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is a slight, unmeritable man, Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit, The threefold world divided, he should stand One of the three to share it?
So you thought him.And took his voice who should be pricked to dieIn our black sentence and proscription.
Octavius, I have seen more days than you. And though we lay these honors on this man To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, To groan and sweat under the business, Either led or driven, as we point the way. And having brought our treasure where we will, Then take we down his load and turn him off, Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears And graze in commons.
You may do your will,But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.
So is my horse, Octavius, and for that I do appoint him store of provender. It is a creature that I teach to fight, To wind, to stop, to run directly on, His corporal motion governed by my spirit, And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so. He must be taught and trained and bid go forth, A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds On objects, arts, and imitations, Which, out of use and staled by other men, Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him But as a property. And now, Octavius, Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius Are levying powers. We must straight make head. Therefore let our alliance be combined, Our best friends made, our means stretched. And let us presently go sit in council How covert matters may be best disclosed, And open perils surest answered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us do so. For we are at the stake And bayed about with many enemies. And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear, Millions of mischiefs.
Stand, ho!
Give the word, ho, and stand.
What now, Lucillius? Is Cassius near?
He is at hand, and Pindarus is comeTo do you salutation from his master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He greets me well. —Your master, Pindarus, In his own change or by ill officers Hath given me some worthy cause to wish Things done, undone. But if he be at hand I shall be satisfied.
I do not doubtBut that my noble master will appearSuch as he is, full of regard and honor.
He is not doubted. —A word, Lucillius. [takes LUCILLIUS aside] How he received you, let me be resolved.
With courtesy and with respect enough. But not with such familiar instances Nor with such free and friendly conference As he hath used of old.
Thou hast described A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucillius, When love begins to sicken and decay, It useth an enforcèd ceremony. There are no tricks in plain and simple faith. But hollow men, like horses hot at hand, Make gallant show and promise of their mettle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But when they should endure the bloody spur, They fall their crests and, like deceitful jades, Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered.The greater part, the horse in general,Are come with Cassius.
Hark! He is arrived.March gently on to meet him.
Stand, ho!
Stand, ho! Speak the word along.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand!
Stand!
Stand!
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs.And when you do them—
Cassius, be content. Speak your griefs softly. I do know you well. Before the eyes of both our armies here, Which should perceive nothing but love from us, Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away. Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs, And I will give you audience.
Pindarus,Bid our commanders lead their charges offA little from this ground.
Lucillius, do you the like. And let no manCome to our tent till we have done our conference.Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.
That you have wronged me doth appear in this: You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella For taking bribes here of the Sardians, Wherein my letters, praying on his side Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
In such a time as this it is not meetThat every nice offense should bear his comment.
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself Are much condemned to have an itching palm, To sell and mart your offices for gold To undeservers.
I “an itching palm!”You know that you are Brutus that speak this,Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
The name of Cassius honors this corruption,And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Chastisement!
Remember March, the ides of March remember. Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake? What villain touched his body, that did stab, And not for justice? What, shall one of us That struck the foremost man of all this world But for supporting robbers, shall we now Contaminate our fingers with base bribes, And sell the mighty space of our large honors For so much trash as may be graspèd thus? I had rather be a dog and bay the moon Than such a Roman.
Brutus, bait not me. I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I, Older in practice, abler than yourself To make conditions.
Go to. You are not, Cassius.
I am.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I say you are not.
Urge me no more, I shall forget myself.Have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.
Away, slight man!
Is ’t possible?
Hear me, for I will speak.Must I give way and room to your rash choler?Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O ye gods, ye gods, must I endure all this?
“All this?” Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break. Go show your slaves how choleric you are And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge? Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch Under your testy humor? By the gods, You shall digest the venom of your spleen, Though it do split you. For from this day forth, I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter, When you are waspish.
Is it come to this?
You say you are a better soldier.Let it appear so. Make your vaunting true,And it shall please me well. For mine own part,I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
You wrong me every way. You wrong me, Brutus.I said an elder soldier, not a better.Did I say “better?”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you did, I care not.
When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
I durst not!
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, durst not tempt him?
For your life you durst not!
Do not presume too much upon my love.I may do that I shall be sorry for.
You have done that you should be sorry for. There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats, For I am armed so strong in honesty That they pass by me as the idle wind, Which I respect not. I did send to you For certain sums of gold, which you denied me, For I can raise no money by vile means. By heaven, I had rather coin my heart And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash By any indirection. I did send To you for gold to pay my legions, Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius? Should I have answered Caius Cassius so? When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous To lock such rascal counters from his friends, Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts. Dash him to pieces!
I denied you not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You did.
I did not. He was but a fool that brought My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart. A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities, But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
I do not, till you practice them on me.
You love me not.
I do not like your faults.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A friendly eye could never see such faults.
A flatterer’s would not, though they do appearAs huge as high Olympus.
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come, Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius, For Cassius is aweary of the world— Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother; Checked like a bondman, all his faults observed, Set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rote To cast into my teeth. Oh, I could weep My spirit from mine eyes. [offers BRUTUS his bared dagger] There is my dagger. And here my naked breast. Within, a heart Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold. If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth. I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart. Strike, as thou didst at Caesar. For I know When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Sheathe your dagger. Be angry when you will, it shall have scope. Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor. O Cassius, you are yokèd with a lamb That carries anger as the flint bears fire, Who, much enforcèd, shows a hasty spark And straight is cold again.
Hath Cassius livedTo be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
And my heart too.
O Brutus!
What’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have not you love enough to bear with me,When that rash humor which my mother gave meMakes me forgetful?
Yes, Cassius. And from henceforthWhen you are over-earnest with your Brutus,He’ll think your mother chides and leave you so.
[within] Let me go in to see the generals.There is some grudge between 'em. 'Tis not meetThey be alone.
[within] You shall not come to them.
[within] Nothing but death shall stay me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now? What’s the matter?
For shame, you generals! What do you mean?Love, and be friends as two such men should be.For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.
Ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
[to POET] Get you hence, sirrah. Saucy fellow, hence!
Bear with him, Brutus. 'Tis his fashion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll know his humor when he knows his time. What should the wars do with these jigging fools? —Companion, hence!
Away, away, be gone.
Lucillius and Titinius, bid the commandersPrepare to lodge their companies tonight.
And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you,Immediately to us.
[calls off] Lucius, a bowl of wine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did not think you could have been so angry.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
Of your philosophy you make no useIf you give place to accidental evils.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
Ha, Portia?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is dead.
How ’scaped I killing when I crossed you so? O insupportable and touching loss! Upon what sickness?
Impatient of my absence, And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony Have made themselves so strong—for with her death That tidings came—with this she fell distract And, her attendants absent, swallowed fire.
And died so?
Even so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O ye immortal gods!
Speak no more of her.—Give me a bowl of wine.—In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius. [drinks]
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup.I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love. [drinks]
Come in, Titinius.—Welcome, good Messala!Now sit we close about this taper hereAnd call in question our necessities.
Portia, art thou gone?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more, I pray you.—Messala, I have here receivèd lettersThat young Octavius and Mark AntonyCome down upon us with a mighty power,Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
With what addition?
That by proscription and bills of outlawry,Octavius, Antony, and LepidusHave put to death an hundred senators.
Therein our letters do not well agree.Mine speak of seventy senators that diedBy their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cicero one?
Cicero is dead, And by that order of proscription. [to BRUTUS] Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
No, Messala.
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
Nothing, Messala.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That methinks is strange.
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?
No, my lord.
Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell.For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.With meditating that she must die once,I have the patience to endure it now.
Even so great men great losses should endure.
I have as much of this in art as you,But yet my nature could not bear it so.
Well, to our work alive. What do you thinkOf marching to Philippi presently?
I do not think it good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your reason?
This it is: 'Tis better that the enemy seek us. So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers, Doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still, Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
Good reasons must of force give place to better. The people ’twixt Philippi and this ground Do stand but in a forced affection, For they have grudged us contribution. The enemy, marching along by them, By them shall make a fuller number up, Come on refreshed, new-added, and encouraged, From which advantage shall we cut him off If at Philippi we do face him there, These people at our back.
Hear me, good brother—
Under your pardon. You must note beside, That we have tried the utmost of our friends, Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe. The enemy increaseth every day. We, at the height, are ready to decline. There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune; Omitted, all the voyage of their life Is bound in shallows and in miseries. On such a full sea are we now afloat, And we must take the current when it serves Or lose our ventures.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, with your will, go on.We’ll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk, And nature must obey necessity, Which we will niggard with a little rest. There is no more to say?
No more. Good night.Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
Lucius!
My gown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, good Messala.—Good night, Titinius.—Noble, noble Cassius,Good night and good repose.
O my dear brother,This was an ill beginning of the night.Never come such division ’tween our souls.Let it not, Brutus.
Everything is well.
Good night, my lord.
Good night, good brother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good night, Lord Brutus.
Farewell, everyone.
Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
Here in the tent.
What, thou speak’st drowsily? Poor knave, I blame thee not. Thou art o'erwatched. Call Claudio and some other of my men. I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Varrus and Claudio!
Calls my lord?
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep.It may be I shall raise you by and byOn business to my brother Cassius.
So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
I will not have it so. Lie down, good sirs. It may be I shall otherwise bethink me. —Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so. I put it in the pocket of my gown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful. Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile, And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
Ay, my lord, an ’t please you.
It does, my boy.I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
It is my duty, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I should not urge thy duty past thy might.I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
I have slept, my lord, already.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again.I will not hold thee long. If I do live,I will be good to thee.
This is a sleepy tune. O murderous slumber, Layst thou thy leaden mace upon my boy That plays thee music? —Gentle knave, good night. I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee. If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument. I’ll take it from thee. And, good boy, good night. —Let me see, let me see. Is not the leaf turned down Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.
How ill this taper burns!—Ha, who comes here? I think it is the weakness of mine eyes That shapes this monstrous apparition. It comes upon me.—Art thou any thing? Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare? Speak to me what thou art.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
Why comest thou?
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
Well, then I shall see thee again?
Ay, at Philippi.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then.
Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.—Boy, Lucius!—Varrus!—Claudio!—Sirs, awake!—Claudio!
The strings, my lord, are false.
He thinks he still is at his instrument.Lucius, awake.
My lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see any thing?
Nothing, my lord.
Sleep again, Lucius.—Sirrah Claudio! [to VARRUS] Fellow thou, awake!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
My lord?
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
Did we, my lord?
Ay. Saw you anything?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my lord, I saw nothing.
Nor I, my lord.
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius. Bid him set on his powers betimes before, And we will follow.
It shall be done, my lord.
Now, Antony, our hopes are answerèd. You said the enemy would not come down But keep the hills and upper regions. It proves not so. Their battles are at hand. They mean to warn us at Philippi here, Answering before we do demand of them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know Wherefore they do it. They could be content To visit other places, and come down With fearful bravery, thinking by this face To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage. But ’tis not so.
Prepare you, generals. The enemy comes on in gallant show. Their bloody sign of battle is hung out, And something to be done immediately.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on,Upon the left hand of the even field.
Upon the right hand I. Keep thou the left.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not cross you. But I will do so.
They stand and would have parley.
Stand fast, Titinius. We must out and talk.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge. Make forth. The generals would have some words.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to his army] Stir not until the signal.
Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?
Not that we love words better, as you do.
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart,Crying “Long live, hail, Caesar!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Antony,The posture of your blows are yet unknown.But for your words, they rob the Hybla beesAnd leave them honeyless.
Not stingless too?
Oh, yes, and soundless too.For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,And very wisely threat before you sting.
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar. You showed your teeth like apes, and fawned like hounds, And bowed like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet, Whilst damnèd Casca, like a cur, behind Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
Flatterers?—Now, Brutus, thank yourself.This tongue had not offended so todayIf Cassius might have ruled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat, The proof of it will turn to redder drops. [draws his sword] Look, I draw a sword against conspirators. When think you that the sword goes up again? Never, till Caesar’s three and thirty wounds Be well avenged, or till another Caesar Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' handsUnless thou bring’st them with thee.
So I hope.I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honor,Joined with a masker and a reveler!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Old Cassius still.
Come, Antony, away.— Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth. If you dare fight today, come to the field. If not, when you have stomachs.
Why, now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark!The storm is up and all is on the hazard.
Ho, Lucillius, hark, a word with you.
[stands forth] My lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Messala!
[stands forth] What says my general?
Messala, This is my birthday, as this very day Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala. Be thou my witness that against my will, As Pompey was, am I compelled to set Upon one battle all our liberties. You know that I held Epicurus strong And his opinion. Now I change my mind, And partly credit things that do presage. Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched, Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands, Who to Philippi here consorted us. This morning are they fled away and gone, And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem A canopy most fatal, under which Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
Believe not so.
I but believe it partly,For I am fresh of spirit and resolvedTo meet all perils very constantly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][returning with LUCILLIUS] Even so, Lucillius.
Now, most noble Brutus, The gods today stand friendly that we may, Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age. But since the affairs of men rest still incertain, Let’s reason with the worst that may befall. If we do lose this battle, then is this The very last time we shall speak together. What are you then determinèd to do?
Even by the rule of that philosophy By which I did blame Cato for the death Which he did give himself — I know not how, But I do find it cowardly and vile, For fear of what might fall, so to prevent The time of life — arming myself with patience To stay the providence of some high powers That govern us below.
Then if we lose this battleYou are contented to be led in triumphThorough the streets of Rome?
No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman, That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome. He bears too great a mind. But this same day Must end that work the ides of March begun. And whether we shall meet again I know not. Therefore our everlasting farewell take. Forever and forever farewell, Cassius. If we do meet again, why, we shall smile. If not, why then this parting was well made.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Forever and forever farewell, Brutus.If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed.If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.
Why then, lead on. Oh, that a man might know The end of this day’s business ere it come! But it sufficeth that the day will end, And then the end is known.—Come, ho! Away!
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these billsUnto the legions on the other side.
Let them set on at once, for I perceive But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing, And sudden push gives them the overthrow. Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.
O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly! Myself have to mine own turned enemy. This ensign here of mine was turning back. I slew the coward and did take it from him. [indicates his standard]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early, Who, having some advantage on Octavius, Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil, Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off. Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord. Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
This hill is far enough.—Look, look, Titinius.Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
They are, my lord.
Titinius, if thou lovest me, Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops And here again, that I may rest assured Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will be here again, even with a thought.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill. My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius, And tell me what thou notest about the field.
This day I breathed first. Time is come round, And where I did begin, there shall I end. My life is run his compass. [to PINDARUS] Sirrah, what news?
[above] O my lord!
What news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][above] Titinius is enclosèd round about With horsemen, that make to him on the spur. Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him. Now, Titinius. Now some light. Oh, he lights too. He’s ta'en.
And, hark! They shout for joy.
Come down, behold no more.Oh, coward that I am, to live so longTo see my best friend ta'en before my face!
Come hither, sirrah. In Parthia did I take thee prisoner. And then I swore thee, saving of thy life, That whatsoever I did bid thee do, Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath. [gives his sword to PINDARUS] Now be a free man, and with this good sword That ran through Caesar’s bowels, search this bosom. Stand not to answer. Here take thou the hilts And, when my face is covered, as ’tis now, Guide thou the sword.
Caesar, thou art revenged,Even with the sword that killed thee. [dies]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So I am free. Yet would not so have been, Durst I have done my will. O Cassius, Far from this country Pindarus shall run, Where never Roman shall take note of him.
It is but change, Titinius, for OctaviusIs overthrown by noble Brutus' power,As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him?
All disconsolate,With Pindarus his bondman on this hill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
He lies not like the living. O my heart!
Is not that he?
No, this was he, Messala, But Cassius is no more. O setting sun, As in thy red rays thou dost sink tonight, So in his red blood Cassius' day is set. The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone. Clouds, dews, and dangers come! Our deeds are done. Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed. O hateful error, melancholy’s child, Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men The things that are not? O error, soon conceived, Thou never comest unto a happy birth But kill’st the mother that engendered thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet The noble Brutus, thrusting this report Into his ears. I may say “thrusting” it, For piercing steel and darts envenomèd Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus As tidings of this sight.
Hie you, Messala,And I will seek for Pindarus the while.
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius? Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they Put on my brows this wreath of victory And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts? Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything! But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow. Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I Will do his bidding. [lays wreath on CASSIUS’ head] Brutus, come apace, And see how I regarded Caius Cassius. —By your leave, gods, this is a Roman’s part. Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart. [stabs himself with CASSIUS’s sword and dies]
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Titinius' face is upward.
He is slain.
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swordsIn our own proper entrails.
Brave Titinius!—Look whe 'er he have not crowned dead Cassius.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are yet two Romans living such as these? —The last of all the Romans, fare thee well! It is impossible that ever Rome Should breed thy fellow. —Friends, I owe more tears To this dead man than you shall see me pay. —I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time. —Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body. His funerals shall not be in our camp, Lest it discomfort us. —Lucillius, come. — And come, young Cato. Let us to the field. —Labio and Flavio, set our battles on. —'Tis three o'clock, and, Romans, yet ere night We shall try fortune in a second fight.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
What bastard doth not? Who will go with me? I will proclaim my name about the field. I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho! A foe to tyrants, and my country’s friend. I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I!Brutus, my country’s friend. Know me for Brutus!
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,And mayst be honored, being Cato’s son.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LUCILLIUS] Yield, or thou diest.
Only I yield to die.There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight.Kill Brutus, and be honored in his death.
We must not. A noble prisoner!
Room, ho! Tell Antony Brutus is ta'en.
I’ll tell the news. Here comes the general.—Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is he?
Safe, Antony. Brutus is safe enough. I dare assure thee that no enemy Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus. The gods defend him from so great a shame! When you do find him, or alive or dead, He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
[to SOLDIERS] This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assureyou, A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe. Give him all kindness. I had rather have Such men my friends than enemies. Go on, And see whether Brutus be alive or dead. And bring us word unto Octavius' tent How everything is chanced.
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
Statilius showed the torchlight but, my lord,He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word.It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus. [whispers to CLITUS]
What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
Peace then! No words.
I’ll rather kill myself.
Hark thee, Dardanius. [whispers to DARDANIUS]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I do such a deed?
O Dardanius!
O Clitus!
[aside to DARDANIUS] What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
[aside to CLITUS] To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to DARDANIUS] Now is that noble vessel full of grief,That it runs over even at his eyes.
Come hither, good Volumnius. List a word.
What says my lord?
Why this, Volumnius: The ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me Two several times by night. At Sardis once, And this last night here in Philippi fields. I know my hour is come.
Not so, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes.Our enemies have beat us to the pit.
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius, Thou know’st that we two went to school together. Even for that our love of old, I prithee, Hold thou my sword hilts, whilst I run on it.
That’s not an office for a friend, my lord.
Fly, fly, my lord. There is no tarrying here.
Farewell to you. —And you .—And you, Volumnius. —Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep. Farewell to thee too, Strato. —Countrymen, My heart doth joy that yet in all my life I found no man but he was true to me. I shall have glory by this losing day More than Octavius and Mark Antony By this vile conquest shall attain unto. So fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue Hath almost ended his life’s history. Night hangs upon mine eyes. My bones would rest, That have but labored to attain this hour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fly, my lord, fly.
Hence. I will follow.
I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord. Thou art a fellow of a good respect. Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it. Hold then my sword and turn away thy face While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
Give me your hand first. [holds BRUTUS' sword] Fare you well, my lord.
Farewell, good Strato. [runs on his sword] Caesar, now be still.I killed not thee with half so good a will. [dies]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What man is that?
My master’s man.—Strato, where is thy master?
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala. The conquerors can but make a fire of him. For Brutus only overcame himself, And no man else hath honor by his death.
So Brutus should be found.—I thank thee, Brutus,That thou hast proved Lucillius' saying true.
All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.—Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Do so, good Messala.
How died my master, Strato?
I held the sword and he did run on it.
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,That did the latest service to my master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was the noblest Roman of them all. All the conspirators save only he Did that they did in envy of great Caesar. He only in a general honest thought And common good to all, made one of them. His life was gentle, and the elements So mixed in him that Nature might stand up And say to all the world, “This was a man.”
According to his virtue let us use him, With all respect and rites of burial. Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie Most like a soldier, ordered honorably. So call the field to rest, and let’s away To part the glories of this happy day.
Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us?
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of FranceIn my behavior to the majesty,The borrow'd majesty, of England here.
A strange beginning: 'borrow'd majesty!'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.
Philip of France, in right and true behalf Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son, Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim To this fair island and the territories, To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine, Desiring thee to lay aside the sword Which sways usurpingly these several titles, And put these same into young Arthur's hand, Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.
What follows if we disallow of this?
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,Controlment for controlment: so answer France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then take my king's defiance from my mouth,The farthest limit of my embassy.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace: Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France; For ere thou canst report I will be there, The thunder of my cannon shall be heard: So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath And sullen presage of your own decay. An honourable conduct let him have: Pembroke, look to 't. Farewell, Chatillon.
What now, my son! have I not ever said How that ambitious Constance would not cease Till she had kindled France and all the world, Upon the right and party of her son? This might have been prevented and made whole With very easy arguments of love, Which now the manage of two kingdoms must With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
Our strong possession and our right for us.
Your strong possession much more than your right, Or else it must go wrong with you and me: So much my conscience whispers in your ear, Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My liege, here is the strangest controversyCome from country to be judged by you,That e'er I heard: shall I produce the men?
Let them approach.Our abbeys and our priories shall payThis expedition's charge.
What men are you?
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman Born in Northamptonshire and eldest son, As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge, A soldier, by the honour-giving hand Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.
What art thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?You came not of one mother then, it seems.
Most certain of one mother, mighty king; That is well known; and, as I think, one father: But for the certain knowledge of that truth I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother: Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
Out on thee, rude man! thou dost shame thy motherAnd wound her honour with this diffidence.
I, madam? no, I have no reason for it; That is my brother's plea and none of mine; The which if he can prove, a' pops me out At least from fair five hundred pound a year: Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
I know not why, except to get the land. But once he slander'd me with bastardy: But whether I be as true begot or no, That still I lay upon my mother's head, But that I am as well begot, my liege,— Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!— Compare our faces and be judge yourself. If old sir Robert did beget us both And were our father and this son like him, O old sir Robert, father, on my knee I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face;The accent of his tongue affecteth him.Do you not read some tokens of my sonIn the large composition of this man?
Mine eye hath well examined his partsAnd finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Because he hath a half-face, like my father.With half that face would he have all my land:A half-faced groat five hundred pound a year!
My gracious liege, when that my father lived,Your brother did employ my father much,—
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother.
And once dispatch'd him in an embassy To Germany, there with the emperor To treat of high affairs touching that time. The advantage of his absence took the king And in the mean time sojourn'd at my father's; Where how he did prevail I shame to speak, But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores Between my father and my mother lay, As I have heard my father speak himself, When this same lusty gentleman was got. Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd His lands to me, and took it on his death That this my mother's son was none of his; And if he were, he came into the world Full fourteen weeks before the course of time. Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine, My father's land, as was my father's will.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate; Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him, And if she did play false, the fault was hers; Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother, Who, as you say, took pains to get this son, Had of your father claim'd this son for his? In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept This calf bred from his cow from all the world; In sooth he might; then, if he were my brother's, My brother might not claim him; nor your father, Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes; My mother's son did get your father's heir; Your father's heir must have your father's land.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall then my father's will be of no forceTo dispossess that child which is not his?
Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,Than was his will to get me, as I think.
Whether hadst thou rather be a FaulconbridgeAnd like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
Madam, an if my brother had my shape, And I had his, sir Robert's his, like him; And if my legs were two such riding-rods, My arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose Lest men should say 'Look, where three-farthings goes!' And, to his shape, were heir to all this land, Would I might never stir from off this place, I would give it every foot to have this face; I would not be sir Nob in any case.
I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune,Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?I am a soldier and now bound to France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance. Your face hath got five hundred pound a year, Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear. Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
Our country manners give our betters way.
What is thy name?
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,Philip, good old sir Robert's wife's eldest son.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bear'st:Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,Arise sir Richard and Plantagenet.
Brother by the mother's side, give me your hand: My father gave me honour, yours gave land. Now blessed be the hour, by night or day, When I was got, sir Robert was away!
The very spirit of Plantagenet!I am thy grandam, Richard; call me so.
Madam, by chance but not by truth; what though? Something about, a little from the right, In at the window, or else o'er the hatch: Who dares not stir by day must walk by night, And have is have, however men do catch: Near or far off, well won is still well shot, And I am I, howe'er I was begot.

[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee!For thou wast got i' the way of honesty.
A foot of honour better than I was; But many a many foot of land the worse. Well, now can I make any Joan a lady. 'Good den, sir Richard!'—'God-a-mercy, fellow!'— And if his name be George, I'll call him Peter; For new-made honour doth forget men's names; 'Tis too respective and too sociable For your conversion. Now your traveller, He and his toothpick at my worship's mess, And when my knightly stomach is sufficed, Why then I suck my teeth and catechise My picked man of countries: 'My dear sir,' Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin, 'I shall beseech you'—that is question now; And then comes answer like an Absey book: 'O sir,' says answer, 'at your best command; At your employment; at your service, sir;' 'No, sir,' says question, 'I, sweet sir, at yours:' And so, ere answer knows what question would, Saving in dialogue of compliment, And talking of the Alps and Apennines, The Pyrenean and the river Po, It draws toward supper in conclusion so. But this is worshipful society And fits the mounting spirit like myself, For he is but a bastard to the time That doth not smack of observation; And so am I, whether I smack or no; And not alone in habit and device, Exterior form, outward accoutrement, But from the inward motion to deliver Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth: Which, though I will not practise to deceive, Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn; For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising. But who comes in such haste in riding-robes? What woman-post is this? hath she no husband That will take pains to blow a horn before her?
O me! it is my mother. How now, good lady!What brings you here to court so hastily?
Where is that slave, thy brother? where is he,That holds in chase mine honour up and down?
My brother Robert? old sir Robert's son?Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?Is it sir Robert's son that you seek so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Robert's son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,Sir Robert's son: why scorn'st thou at sir Robert?He is sir Robert's son, and so art thou.
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?
Good leave, good Philip.
Philip! sparrow: James,There's toys abroad: anon I'll tell thee more.
Madam, I was not old sir Robert's son: Sir Robert might have eat his part in me Upon Good-Friday and ne'er broke his fast: Sir Robert could do well: marry, to confess, Could he get me? Sir Robert could not do it: We know his handiwork: therefore, good mother, To whom am I beholding for these limbs? Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like. What! I am dubb'd! I have it on my shoulder. But, mother, I am not sir Robert's son; I have disclaim'd sir Robert and my land; Legitimation, name and all is gone: Then, good my mother, let me know my father; Some proper man, I hope: who was it, mother?
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father: By long and vehement suit I was seduced To make room for him in my husband's bed: Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge! Thou art the issue of my dear offence, Which was so strongly urged past my defence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, by this light, were I to get again, Madam, I would not wish a better father. Some sins do bear their privilege on earth, And so doth yours; your fault was not your folly: Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose, Subjected tribute to commanding love, Against whose fury and unmatched force The aweless lion could not wage the fight, Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand. He that perforce robs lions of their hearts May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother, With all my heart I thank thee for my father! Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell. Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin; And they shall say, when Richard me begot, If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin: Who says it was, he lies; I say 'twas not.
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria. Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood, Richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart And fought the holy wars in Palestine, By this brave duke came early to his grave: And for amends to his posterity, At our importance hither is he come, To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf, And to rebuke the usurpation Of thy unnatural uncle, English John: Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion's death The rather that you give his offspring life, Shadowing their right under your wings of war: I give you welcome with a powerless hand, But with a heart full of unstained love: Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.
A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss, As seal to this indenture of my love, That to my home I will no more return, Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France, Together with that pale, that white-faced shore, Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides And coops from other lands her islanders, Even till that England, hedged in with the main, That water-walled bulwark, still secure And confident from foreign purposes, Even till that utmost corner of the west Salute thee for her king: till then, fair boy, Will I not think of home, but follow arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks,Till your strong hand shall help to give him strengthTo make a more requital to your love!
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swordsIn such a just and charitable war.
Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent Against the brows of this resisting town. Call for our chiefest men of discipline, To cull the plots of best advantages: We'll lay before this town our royal bones, Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood, But we will make it subject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to your embassy, Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood: My Lord Chatillon may from England bring, That right in peace which here we urge in war, And then we shall repent each drop of blood That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.
A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish, Our messenger Chatillon is arrived! What England says, say briefly, gentle lord; We coldly pause for thee; Chatillon, speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then turn your forces from this paltry siege And stir them up against a mightier task. England, impatient of your just demands, Hath put himself in arms: the adverse winds, Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time To land his legions all as soon as I; His marches are expedient to this town, His forces strong, his soldiers confident. With him along is come the mother-queen, An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife; With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain; With them a bastard of the king's deceased, And all the unsettled humours of the land, Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries, With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens, Have sold their fortunes at their native homes, Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs, To make hazard of new fortunes here: In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er Did nearer float upon the swelling tide, To do offence and scath in Christendom.
The interruption of their churlish drumsCuts off more circumstance: they are at hand,To parley or to fight; therefore prepare.
How much unlook'd for is this expedition!
By how much unexpected, by so much We must awake endeavour for defence; For courage mounteth with occasion: Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit Our just and lineal entrance to our own; If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven, Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace be to England, if that war return From France to England, there to live in peace. England we love; and for that England's sake With burden of our armour here we sweat. This toil of ours should be a work of thine; But thou from loving England art so far, That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king, Cut off the sequence of posterity, Out-faced infant state and done a rape Upon the maiden virtue of the crown. Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face; These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his: This little abstract doth contain that large Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume. That Geffrey was thy elder brother born, And this his son; England was Geffrey's right And this is Geffrey's: in the name of God How comes it then that thou art call'd a king, When living blood doth in these temples beat, Which owe the crown that thou o'ermasterest?
From whom hast thou this great commission, France,To draw my answer from thy articles?
From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts In any breast of strong authority, To look into the blots and stains of right: That judge hath made me guardian to this boy: Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
Excuse; it is to beat usurping down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
Let me make answer; thy usurping son.
Out, insolent! thy bastard shall be king,That thou mayst be a queen, and cheque the world!
My bed was ever to thy son as true As thine was to thy husband; and this boy Liker in feature to his father Geffrey Than thou and John in manners; being as like As rain to water, or devil to his dam. My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think His father never was so true begot: It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
Peace!
Hear the crier.
What the devil art thou?
One that will play the devil, sir, with you, An a' may catch your hide and you alone: You are the hare of whom the proverb goes, Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard; I'll smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right; Sirrah, look to't; i' faith, I will, i' faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, well did he become that lion's robeThat did disrobe the lion of that robe!
It lies as sightly on the back of him As great Alcides' shows upon an as s: But, ass, I'll take that burthen from your back, Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.
What craker is this same that deafs our earsWith this abundance of superfluous breath?
Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.
Women and fools, break off your conference. King John, this is the very sum of all; England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine, In right of Arthur do I claim of thee: Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My life as soon: I do defy thee, France. Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand; And out of my dear love I'll give thee more Than e'er the coward hand of France can win: Submit thee, boy.
Come to thy grandam, child.
Do, child, go to it grandam, child: Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig: There's a good grandam.
Good my mother, peace!I would that I were low laid in my grave:I am not worth this coil that's made for me.
His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now shame upon you, whether she does or no! His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's shames, Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes, Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee; Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed To do him justice and revenge on you.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth! Call not me slanderer; thou and thine usurp The dominations, royalties and rights Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eld'st son's son, Infortunate in nothing but in thee: Thy sins are visited in this poor child; The canon of the law is laid on him, Being but the second generation Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
Bedlam, have done.
I have but this to say, That he is not only plagued for her sin, But God hath made her sin and her the plague On this removed issue, plague for her And with her plague; her sin his injury, Her injury the beadle to her sin, All punish'd in the person of this child, And all for her; a plague upon her!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou unadvised scold, I can produceA will that bars the title of thy son.
Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will:A woman's will; a canker'd grandam's will!
Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate: It ill beseems this presence to cry aim To these ill-tuned repetitions. Some trumpet summon hither to the walls These men of Angiers: let us hear them speak Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.
Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?
'Tis France, for England.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]England, for itself.You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects—
You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle—
For our advantage; therefore hear us first. These flags of France, that are advanced here Before the eye and prospect of your town, Have hither march'd to your endamagement: The cannons have their bowels full of wrath, And ready mounted are they to spit forth Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls: All preparation for a bloody siege All merciless proceeding by these French Confronts your city's eyes, your winking gates; And but for our approach those sleeping stones, That as a waist doth girdle you about, By the compulsion of their ordinance By this time from their fixed beds of lime Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made For bloody power to rush upon your peace. But on the sight of us your lawful king, Who painfully with much expedient march Have brought a countercheque before your gates, To save unscratch'd your city's threatened cheeks, Behold, the French amazed vouchsafe a parle; And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire, To make a shaking fever in your walls, They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke, To make a faithless error in your ears: Which trust accordingly, kind citizens, And let us in, your king, whose labour'd spirits, Forwearied in this action of swift speed, Crave harbourage within your city walls.
When I have said, make answer to us both. Lo, in this right hand, whose protection Is most divinely vow'd upon the right Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet, Son to the elder brother of this man, And king o'er him and all that he enjoys: For this down-trodden equity, we tread In warlike march these greens before your town, Being no further enemy to you Than the constraint of hospitable zeal In the relief of this oppressed child Religiously provokes. Be pleased then To pay that duty which you truly owe To that owes it, namely this young prince: And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear, Save in aspect, hath all offence seal'd up; Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent Against the invulnerable clouds of heaven; And with a blessed and unvex'd retire, With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruised, We will bear home that lusty blood again Which here we came to spout against your town, And leave your children, wives and you in peace. But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer, 'Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls Can hide you from our messengers of war, Though all these English and their discipline Were harbour'd in their rude circumference. Then tell us, shall your city call us lord, In that behalf which we have challenged it? Or shall we give the signal to our rage And stalk in blood to our possession?
In brief, we are the king of England's subjects:For him, and in his right, we hold this town.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Acknowledge then the king, and let me in.
That can we not; but he that proves the king,To him will we prove loyal: till that timeHave we ramm'd up our gates against the world.
Doth not the crown of England prove the king?And if not that, I bring you witnesses,Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed,—
Bastards, and else.
To verify our title with their lives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As many and as well-born bloods as those,—
Some bastards too.
Stand in his face to contradict his claim.
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
Then God forgive the sin of all those soulsThat to their everlasting residence,Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet,In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Amen, amen! Mount, chevaliers! to arms!
Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e'er sinceSits on his horseback at mine hostess' door,Teach us some fence!
Sirrah, were I at home,At your den, sirrah, with your lionessI would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,And make a monster of you.
Peace! no more.
O tremble, for you hear the lion roar.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Up higher to the plain; where we'll set forthIn best appointment all our regiments.
Speed then, to take advantage of the field.
It shall be so; and at the other hillCommand the rest to stand. God and our right!
You men of Angiers, open wide your gates, And let young Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in, Who by the hand of France this day hath made Much work for tears in many an English mother, Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground; Many a widow's husband grovelling lies, Coldly embracing the discolour'd earth; And victory, with little loss, doth play Upon the dancing banners of the French, Who are at hand, triumphantly display'd, To enter conquerors and to proclaim Arthur of Bretagne England's king and yours.
Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells: King John, your king and England's doth approach, Commander of this hot malicious day: Their armours, that march'd hence so silver-bright, Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood; There stuck no plume in any English crest That is removed by a staff of France; Our colours do return in those same hands That did display them when we first march'd forth; And, like a troop of jolly huntsmen, come Our lusty English, all with purpled hands, Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes: Open your gates and gives the victors way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heralds, from off our towers we might behold, From first to last, the onset and retire Of both your armies; whose equality By our best eyes cannot be censured: Blood hath bought blood and blows have answered blows; Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power: Both are alike; and both alike we like. One must prove greatest: while they weigh so even, We hold our town for neither, yet for both.
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away? Say, shall the current of our right run on? Whose passage, vex'd with thy impediment, Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell With course disturb'd even thy confining shores, Unless thou let his silver water keep A peaceful progress to the ocean.
England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood, In this hot trial, more than we of France; Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear, That sways the earth this climate overlooks, Before we will lay down our just-borne arms, We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear, Or add a royal number to the dead, Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
Ha, majesty! how high thy glory towers, When the rich blood of kings is set on fire! O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel; The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs; And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men, In undetermined differences of kings. Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus? Cry, 'havoc!' kings; back to the stained field, You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits! Then let confusion of one part confirm The other's peace: till then, blows, blood and death!
Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak, citizens, for England; who's your king?
The king of England; when we know the king.
Know him in us, that here hold up his right.
In us, that are our own great deputyAnd bear possession of our person here,Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.
A greater power than we denies all this; And till it be undoubted, we do lock Our former scruple in our strong-barr'd gates; King'd of our fears, until our fears, resolved, Be by some certain king purged and deposed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings, And stand securely on their battlements, As in a theatre, whence they gape and point At your industrious scenes and acts of death. Your royal presences be ruled by me: Do like the mutines of Jerusalem, Be friends awhile and both conjointly bend Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town: By east and west let France and England mount Their battering cannon charged to the mouths, Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city: I'ld play incessantly upon these jades, Even till unfenced desolation Leave them as naked as the vulgar air. That done, dissever your united strengths, And part your mingled colours once again; Turn face to face and bloody point to point; Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth Out of one side her happy minion, To whom in favour she shall give the day, And kiss him with a glorious victory. How like you this wild counsel, mighty states? Smacks it not something of the policy?
Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads, I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers And lay this Angiers even to the ground; Then after fight who shall be king of it?
An if thou hast the mettle of a king, Being wronged as we are by this peevish town, Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery, As we will ours, against these saucy walls; And when that we have dash'd them to the ground, Why then defy each other and pell-mell Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.
Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?
We from the west will send destructionInto this city's bosom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I from the north.
Our thunder from the southShall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
O prudent discipline! From north to south:Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth:I'll stir them to it. Come, away, away!
Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay, And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league; Win you this city without stroke or wound; Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds, That here come sacrifices for the field: Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.
Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch, Is niece to England: look upon the years Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid: If lusty love should go in quest of beauty, Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch? If zealous love should go in search of virtue, Where should he find it purer than in Blanch? If love ambitious sought a match of birth, Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch? Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth, Is the young Dauphin every way complete: If not complete of, say he is not she; And she again wants nothing, to name want, If want it be not that she is not he: He is the half part of a blessed man, Left to be finished by such as she; And she a fair divided excellence, Whose fulness of perfection lies in him. O, two such silver currents, when they join, Do glorify the banks that bound them in; And two such shores to two such streams made one, Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings, To these two princes, if you marry them. This union shall do more than battery can To our fast-closed gates; for at this match, With swifter spleen than powder can enforce, The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope, And give you entrance: but without this match, The sea enraged is not half so deaf, Lions more confident, mountains and rocks More free from motion, no, not Death himself In moral fury half so peremptory, As we to keep this city.
Here's a stay That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth, indeed, That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas, Talks as familiarly of roaring lions As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs! What cannoneer begot this lusty blood? He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke and bounce; He gives the bastinado with his tongue: Our ears are cudgell'd; not a word of his But buffets better than a fist of France: Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.
Son, list to this conjunction, make this match; Give with our niece a dowry large enough: For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie Thy now unsured assurance to the crown, That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit. I see a yielding in the looks of France; Mark, how they whisper: urge them while their souls Are capable of this ambition, Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath Of soft petitions, pity and remorse, Cool and congeal again to what it was.
Why answer not the double majestiesThis friendly treaty of our threaten'd town?
Speak England first, that hath been forward firstTo speak unto this city: what say you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son, Can in this book of beauty read 'I love,' Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen: For Anjou and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers, And all that we upon this side the sea, Except this city now by us besieged, Find liable to our crown and dignity, Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich In titles, honours and promotions, As she in beauty, education, blood, Holds hand with any princess of the world.
What say'st thou, boy? look in the lady's face.
I do, my lord; and in her eye I find A wonder, or a wondrous miracle, The shadow of myself form'd in her eye: Which being but the shadow of your son, Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow: I do protest I never loved myself Till now infixed I beheld myself Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye! Hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow! And quarter'd in her heart! he doth espy Himself love's traitor: this is pity now, That hang'd and drawn and quartered, there should be In such a love so vile a lout as he.
My uncle's will in this respect is mine: If he see aught in you that makes him like, That any thing he sees, which moves his liking, I can with ease translate it to my will; Or if you will, to speak more properly, I will enforce it easily to my love. Further I will not flatter you, my lord, That all I see in you is worthy love, Than this; that nothing do I see in you, Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge, That I can find should merit any hate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say these young ones? What say you my niece?
That she is bound in honour still to doWhat you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
Speak then, prince Dauphin; can you love this lady?
Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;For I do love her most unfeignedly.
Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine, Poictiers and Anjou, these five provinces, With her to thee; and this addition more, Full thirty thousand marks of English coin. Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal, Command thy son and daughter to join hands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It likes us well; young princes, close your hands.
And your lips too; for I am well assuredThat I did so when I was first assured.
Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates, Let in that amity which you have made; For at Saint Mary's chapel presently The rites of marriage shall be solemnized. Is not the Lady Constance in this troop? I know she is not, for this match made up Her presence would have interrupted much: Where is she and her son? tell me, who knows.
She is sad and passionate at your highness' tent.
And, by my faith, this league that we have made Will give her sadness very little cure. Brother of England, how may we content This widow lady? In her right we came; Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way, To our own vantage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will heal up all; For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Bretagne And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance; Some speedy messenger bid her repair To our solemnity: I trust we shall, If not fill up the measure of her will, Yet in some measure satisfy her so That we shall stop her exclamation. Go we, as well as haste will suffer us, To this unlook'd for, unprepared pomp.
Mad world! mad kings! mad composition! John, to stop Arthur's title in the whole, Hath willingly departed with a part, And France, whose armour conscience buckled on, Whom zeal and charity brought to the field As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil, That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith, That daily break-vow, he that wins of all, Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids, Who, having no external thing to lose But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that, That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity, Commodity, the bias of the world, The world, who of itself is peised well, Made to run even upon even ground, Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias, This sway of motion, this Commodity, Makes it take head from all indifferency, From all direction, purpose, course, intent: And this same bias, this Commodity, This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word, Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France, Hath drawn him from his own determined aid, From a resolved and honourable war, To a most base and vile-concluded peace. And why rail I on this Commodity? But for because he hath not woo'd me yet: Not that I have the power to clutch my hand, When his fair angels would salute my palm; But for my hand, as unattempted yet, Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich. Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail And say there is no sin but to be rich; And being rich, my virtue then shall be To say there is no vice but beggary. Since kings break faith upon commodity, Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.
Gone to be married! gone to swear a peace! False blood to false blood join'd! gone to be friends! Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces? It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard: Be well advised, tell o'er thy tale again: It cannot be; thou dost but say 'tis so: I trust I may not trust thee; for thy word Is but the vain breath of a common man: Believe me, I do not believe thee, man; I have a king's oath to the contrary. Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me, For I am sick and capable of fears, Oppress'd with wrongs and therefore full of fears, A widow, husbandless, subject to fears, A woman, naturally born to fears; And though thou now confess thou didst but jest, With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce, But they will quake and tremble all this day. What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head? Why dost thou look so sadly on my son? What means that hand upon that breast of thine? Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum, Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds? Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words? Then speak again; not all thy former tale, But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
As true as I believe you think them falseThat give you cause to prove my saying true.
O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow, Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die, And let belief and life encounter so As doth the fury of two desperate men Which in the very meeting fall and die. Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou? France friend with England, what becomes of me? Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight: This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What other harm have I, good lady, done,But spoke the harm that is by others done?
Which harm within itself so heinous isAs it makes harmful all that speak of it.
I do beseech you, madam, be content.
If thou, that bid'st me be content, wert grim, Ugly and slanderous to thy mother's womb, Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains, Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious, Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks, I would not care, I then would be content, For then I should not love thee , no, nor thou Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown. But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy, Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great: Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast, And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O, She is corrupted, changed and won from thee; She adulterates hourly with thine uncle John, And with her golden hand hath pluck'd on France To tread down fair respect of sovereignty, And made his majesty the bawd to theirs. France is a bawd to Fortune and King John, That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John! Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn? Envenom him with words, or get thee gone And leave those woes alone which I alone Am bound to under-bear.
Pardon me, madam,I may not go without you to the kings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee: I will instruct my sorrows to be proud; For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop. To me and to the state of my great grief Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great That no supporter but the huge firm earth Can hold it up: here I and sorrows sit;Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.
'Tis true, fair daughter; and this blessed day Ever in France shall be kept festival: To solemnize this day the glorious sun Stays in his course and plays the alchemist, Turning with splendor of his precious eye The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold: The yearly course that brings this day about Shall never see it but a holiday.
A wicked day, and not a holy day!
What hath this day deserved? what hath it done, That it in golden letters should be set Among the high tides in the calendar? Nay, rather turn this day out of the week, This day of shame, oppression, perjury. Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child Pray that their burthens may not fall this day, Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd: But on this day let seamen fear no wreck; No bargains break that are not this day made: This day, all things begun come to ill end, Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
By heaven, lady, you shall have no causeTo curse the fair proceedings of this day:Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have beguiled me with a counterfeit Resembling majesty, which, being touch'd and tried, Proves valueless: you are forsworn, forsworn; You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood, But now in arms you strengthen it with yours: The grappling vigour and rough frown of war Is cold in amity and painted peace, And our oppression hath made up this league. Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings! A widow cries; be husband to me, heavens! Let not the hours of this ungodly day Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset, Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings! Hear me, O, hear me!
Lady Constance, peace!
War! war! no peace! peace is to me a war O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame That bloody spoil: thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward! Thou little valiant, great in villany! Thou ever strong upon the stronger side! Thou Fortune's champion that dost never fight But when her humorous ladyship is by To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too, And soothest up greatness. What a fool art thou, A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave, Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side, Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend Upon thy stars, thy fortune and thy strength, And dost thou now fall over to my fores? Thou wear a lion's hide! doff it for shame, And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
O, that a man should speak those words to me!
And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou darest not say so, villain, for thy life.
And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
We like not this; thou dost forget thyself.
Here comes the holy legate of the pope.
Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven! To thee, King John, my holy errand is. I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal, And from Pope Innocent the legate here, Do in his name religiously demand Why thou against the church, our holy mother, So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce Keep Stephen Langton, chosen archbishop Of Canterbury, from that holy see? This, in our foresaid holy father's name, Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What earthy name to interrogatories Can task the free breath of a sacred king? Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name So slight, unworthy and ridiculous, To charge me to an answer, as the pope. Tell him this tale; and from the mouth of England Add thus much more, that no Italian priest Shall tithe or toll in our dominions; But as we, under heaven, are supreme head, So under Him that great supremacy, Where we do reign, we will alone uphold, Without the assistance of a mortal hand: So tell the pope, all reverence set apart To him and his usurp'd authority.
Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
Though you and all the kings of Christendom Are led so grossly by this meddling priest, Dreading the curse that money may buy out; And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust, Purchase corrupted pardon of a man, Who in that sale sells pardon from himself, Though you and all the rest so grossly led This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish, Yet I alone, alone do me oppose Against the pope and count his friends my foes.
Then, by the lawful power that I have, Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate. And blessed shall he be that doth revolt From his allegiance to an heretic; And meritorious shall that hand be call'd, Canonized and worshipped as a saint, That takes away by any secret course Thy hateful life.
O, lawful let it be That I have room with Rome to curse awhile! Good father cardinal, cry thou amen To my keen curses; for without my wrong There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.
And for mine too: when law can do no right, Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong: Law cannot give my child his kingdom here, For he that holds his kingdom holds the law; Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong, How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
Philip of France, on peril of a curse, Let go the hand of that arch-heretic; And raise the power of France upon his head, Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
Look'st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand.
Look to that, devil; lest that France repent,And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]King Philip, listen to the cardinal.
And hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.
Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because—
Your breeches best may carry them.
Philip, what say'st thou to the cardinal?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What should he say, but as the cardinal?
Bethink you, father; for the difference Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome, Or the light loss of England for a friend: Forego the easier.
That's the curse of Rome.
O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee hereIn likeness of a new untrimmed bride.
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,But from her need.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, if thou grant my need, Which only lives but by the death of faith, That need must needs infer this principle, That faith would live again by death of need. O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up; Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!
The king is moved, and answers not to this.
O, be removed from him, and answer well!
Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.
Hang nothing but a calf's-skin, most sweet lout.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am perplex'd, and know not what to say.
What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?
Good reverend father, make my person yours, And tell me how you would bestow yourself. This royal hand and mine are newly knit, And the conjunction of our inward souls Married in league, coupled and linked together With all religious strength of sacred vows; The latest breath that gave the sound of words Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love Between our kingdoms and our royal selves, And even before this truce, but new before, No longer than we well could wash our hands To clap this royal bargain up of peace, Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and over-stain'd With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint The fearful difference of incensed kings: And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood, So newly join'd in love, so strong in both, Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet? Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven, Make such unconstant children of ourselves, As now again to snatch our palm from palm, Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed Of smiling peace to march a bloody host, And make a riot on the gentle brow Of true sincerity? O, holy sir, My reverend father, let it not be so! Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose Some gentle order; and then we shall be blest To do your pleasure and continue friends.
All form is formless, order orderless, Save what is opposite to England's love. Therefore to arms! be champion of our church, Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse, A mother's curse, on her revolting son. France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue, A chafed lion by the mortal paw, A fasting tiger safer by the tooth, Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So makest thou faith an enemy to faith; And like a civil war set'st oath to oath, Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd, That is, to be the champion of our church! What since thou sworest is sworn against thyself And may not be performed by thyself, For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss Is not amiss when it is truly done, And being not done, where doing tends to ill, The truth is then most done not doing it: The better act of purposes mistook Is to mistake again; though indirect, Yet indirection thereby grows direct, And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd. It is religion that doth make vows kept; But thou hast sworn against religion, By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st, And makest an oath the surety for thy truth Against an oath: the truth thou art unsure To swear, swears only not to be forsworn; Else what a mockery should it be to swear! But thou dost swear only to be forsworn; And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear. Therefore thy later vows against thy first Is in thyself rebellion to thyself; And better conquest never canst thou make Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts Against these giddy loose suggestions: Upon which better part our prayers come in, If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know The peril of our curses light on thee So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off, But in despair die under their black weight.
Rebellion, flat rebellion!
Will't not be?Will not a calfs-skin stop that mouth of thine?
Father, to arms!
Upon thy wedding-day? Against the blood that thou hast married? What, shall our feast be kept with slaughter'd men? Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums, Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp? O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new Is husband in my mouth! even for that name, Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce, Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms Against mine uncle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, upon my knee,Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doomForethought by heaven!
Now shall I see thy love: what motive mayBe stronger with thee than the name of wife?
That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,His honour: O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour!
I muse your majesty doth seem so cold,When such profound respects do pull you on.
I will denounce a curse upon his head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.
O fair return of banish'd majesty!
O foul revolt of French inconstancy!
France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.
Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The sun's o'ercast with blood: fair day, adieu! Which is the side that I must go withal? I am with both: each army hath a hand; And in their rage, I having hold of both, They swirl asunder and dismember me. Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win; Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose; Father, I may not wish the fortune thine; Grandam, I will not wish thy fortunes thrive: Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose Assured loss before the match be play'd.
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
Cousin, go draw our puissance together.
France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath; A rage whose heat hath this condition, That nothing can allay, nothing but blood, The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy rage sham burn thee up, and thou shalt turnTo ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire:Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.
No more than he that threats. To arms let's hie!
Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot; Some airy devil hovers in the sky And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there, While Philip breathes.
Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up:My mother is assailed in our tent,And ta'en, I fear.
My lord, I rescued her; Her highness is in safety, fear you not: But on, my liege; for very little pains Will bring this labour to an happy end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To QUEEN ELINOR] So shall it be; your grace shallstay behindSo strongly guarded.
Cousin, look not sad:Thy grandam loves thee; and thy uncle willAs dear be to thee as thy father was.
O, this will make my mother die with grief!
[To the BASTARD] Cousin, away for England! haste before: And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels Set at liberty: the fat ribs of peace Must by the hungry now be fed upon: Use our commission in his utmost force.
Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back, When gold and silver becks me to come on. I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray, If ever I remember to be holy, For your fair safety; so, I kiss your hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, gentle cousin.
Coz, farewell.
Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert, We owe thee much! within this wall of flesh There is a soul counts thee her creditor And with advantage means to pay thy love: And my good friend, thy voluntary oath Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished. Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say, But I will fit it with some better time. By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed To say what good respect I have of thee.
I am much bounden to your majesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet, But thou shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow, Yet it shall come from me to do thee good. I had a thing to say, but let it go: The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day, Attended with the pleasures of the world, Is all too wanton and too full of gawds To give me audience: if the midnight bell Did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth, Sound on into the drowsy race of night; If this same were a churchyard where we stand, And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs, Or if that surly spirit, melancholy, Had baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick, Which else runs tickling up and down the veins, Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes And strain their cheeks to idle merriment, A passion hateful to my purposes, Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes, Hear me without thine ears, and make reply Without a tongue, using conceit alone, Without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words; Then, in despite of brooded watchful day, I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts: But, ah, I will not! yet I love thee well; And, by my troth, I think thou lovest me well.
So well, that what you bid me undertake,Though that my death were adjunct to my act,By heaven, I would do it.
Do not I know thou wouldst? Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye On yon young boy: I 'll tell thee what, my friend, He is a very serpent in my way; And whereso'er this foot of mine doth tread, He lies before me: dost thou understand me? Thou art his keeper.
And I'll keep him so,That he shall not offend your majesty.
Death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
A grave.
He shall not live.
Enough. I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee; Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee: Remember. Madam, fare you well: I'll send those powers o'er to your majesty.
My blessing go with thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For England, cousin, go:Hubert shall be your man, attend on youWith all true duty. On toward Calais, ho!
So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,A whole armado of convicted sailIs scatter'd and disjoin'd from fellowship.
Courage and comfort! all shall yet go well.
What can go well, when we have run so ill? Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost? Arthur ta'en prisoner? divers dear friends slain? And bloody England into England gone, O'erbearing interruption, spite of France?
What he hath won, that hath he fortified: So hot a speed with such advice disposed, Such temperate order in so fierce a cause, Doth want example: who hath read or heard Of any kindred action like to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well could I bear that England had this praise,So we could find some pattern of our shame.
Look, who comes here! a grave unto a soul; Holding the eternal spirit against her will, In the vile prison of afflicted breath. I prithee, lady, go away with me.
Lo, now I now see the issue of your peace.
Patience, good lady! comfort, gentle Constance!
No, I defy all counsel, all redress, But that which ends all counsel, true redress, Death, death; O amiable lovely death! Thou odouriferous stench! sound rottenness! Arise forth from the couch of lasting night, Thou hate and terror to prosperity, And I will kiss thy detestable bones And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows And ring these fingers with thy household worms And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust And be a carrion monster like thyself: Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smilest And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love, O, come to me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O fair affliction, peace!
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry: O, that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth! Then with a passion would I shake the world; And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice, Which scorns a modern invocation.
Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.
Thou art not holy to belie me so; I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine; My name is Constance; I was Geffrey's wife; Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost: I am not mad: I would to heaven I were! For then, 'tis like I should forget myself: O, if I could, what grief should I forget! Preach some philosophy to make me mad, And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal; For being not mad but sensible of grief, My reasonable part produces reason How I may be deliver'd of these woes, And teaches me to kill or hang myself: If I were mad, I should forget my son, Or madly think a babe of clouts were he: I am not mad; too well, too well I feel The different plague of each calamity.
Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note In the fair multitude of those her hairs! Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen, Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends Do glue themselves in sociable grief, Like true, inseparable, faithful loves, Sticking together in calamity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To England, if you will.
Bind up your hairs.
Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it? I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud 'O that these hands could so redeem my son, As they have given these hairs their liberty!' But now I envy at their liberty, And will again commit them to their bonds, Because my poor child is a prisoner. And, father cardinal, I have heard you say That we shall see and know our friends in heaven: If that be true, I shall see my boy again; For since the birth of Cain, the first male child, To him that did but yesterday suspire, There was not such a gracious creature born. But now will canker-sorrow eat my bud And chase the native beauty from his cheek And he will look as hollow as a ghost, As dim and meagre as an ague's fit, And so he'll die; and, rising so again, When I shall meet him in the court of heaven I shall not know him: therefore never, never Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
He talks to me that never had a son.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are as fond of grief as of your child.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child, Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me, Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, Remembers me of all his gracious parts, Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form; Then, have I reason to be fond of grief? Fare you well: had you such a loss as I, I could give better comfort than you do. I will not keep this form upon my head, When there is such disorder in my wit. O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son! My life, my joy, my food, my all the world! My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure!
I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.
There's nothing in this world can make me joy: Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man; And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
Before the curing of a strong disease, Even in the instant of repair and health, The fit is strongest; evils that take leave, On their departure most of all show evil: What have you lost by losing of this day?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All days of glory, joy and happiness.
If you had won it, certainly you had. No, no; when Fortune means to men most good, She looks upon them with a threatening eye. 'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost In this which he accounts so clearly won: Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood. Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit; For even the breath of what I mean to speak Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub, Out of the path which shall directly lead Thy foot to England's throne; and therefore mark. John hath seized Arthur; and it cannot be That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins, The misplaced John should entertain an hour, One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest. A sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand Must be as boisterously maintain'd as gain'd; And he that stands upon a slippery place Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up: That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall; So be it, for it cannot be but so.
But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.
How green you are and fresh in this old world! John lays you plots; the times conspire with you; For he that steeps his safety in true blood Shall find but bloody safety and untrue. This act so evilly born shall cool the hearts Of all his people and freeze up their zeal, That none so small advantage shall step forth To cheque his reign, but they will cherish it; No natural exhalation in the sky, No scope of nature, no distemper'd day, No common wind, no customed event, But they will pluck away his natural cause And call them meteors, prodigies and signs, Abortives, presages and tongues of heaven, Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.
May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
O, sir, when he shall hear of your approach, If that young Arthur be not gone already, Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts Of all his people shall revolt from him And kiss the lips of unacquainted change And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John. Methinks I see this hurly all on foot: And, O, what better matter breeds for you Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge Is now in England, ransacking the church, Offending charity: if but a dozen French Were there in arms, they would be as a call To train ten thousand English to their side, Or as a little snow, tumbled about, Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin, Go with me to the king: 'tis wonderful What may be wrought out of their discontent, Now that their souls are topful of offence. For England go: I will whet on the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Strong reasons make strong actions: let us go:If you say ay, the king will not say no.
Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand Within the arras: when I strike my foot Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth, And bind the boy which you shall find with me Fast to the chair: be heedful: hence, and watch.
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
Uncleanly scruples! fear not you: look to't.
Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, Hubert.
Good morrow, little prince.
As little prince, having so great a titleTo be more prince, as may be. You are sad.
Indeed, I have been merrier.
Mercy on me! Methinks no body should be sad but I: Yet, I remember, when I was in France, Young gentlemen would be as sad as night, Only for wantonness. By my christendom, So I were out of prison and kept sheep, I should be as merry as the day is long; And so I would be here, but that I doubt My uncle practises more harm to me: He is afraid of me and I of him: Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son? No, indeed, is't not; and I would to heaven I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] If I talk to him, with his innocent prateHe will awake my mercy which lies dead:Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.
Are you sick, Hubert? you look pale to-day: In sooth, I would you were a little sick, That I might sit all night and watch with you: I warrant I love you more than you do me.
[Aside] His words do take possession of my bosom.Read here, young Arthur.
How now, foolish rheum! Turning dispiteous torture out of door! I must be brief, lest resolution drop Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears. Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect:Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Young boy, I must.
And will you?
And I will.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache, I knit my handercher about your brows, The best I had, a princess wrought it me, And I did never ask it you again; And with my hand at midnight held your head, And like the watchful minutes to the hour, Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time, Saying, 'What lack you?' and 'Where lies your grief?' Or 'What good love may I perform for you?' Many a poor man's son would have lien still And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you; But you at your sick service had a prince. Nay, you may think my love was crafty love And call it cunning: do, an if you will: If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill, Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes? These eyes that never did nor never shall So much as frown on you.
I have sworn to do it;And with hot irons must I burn them out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, none but in this iron age would do it! The iron of itself, though heat red-hot, Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears And quench his fiery indignation Even in the matter of mine innocence; Nay, after that, consume away in rust But for containing fire to harm mine eye. Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron? An if an angel should have come to me And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes, I would not have believed him,—no tongue but Hubert's .
Come forth.
Do as I bid you do.
O, save me, Hubert, save me! my eyes are outEven with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough? I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still. For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound! Nay, hear me, Hubert, drive these men away, And I will sit as quiet as a lamb; I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word, Nor look upon the iron angerly: Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you, Whatever torment you do put me to.
Go, stand within; let me alone with him.
I am best pleased to be from such a deed.
Alas, I then have chid away my friend!He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart:Let him come back, that his compassion mayGive life to yours.
Come, boy, prepare yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there no remedy?
None, but to lose your eyes.
O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours, A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair, Any annoyance in that precious sense! Then feeling what small things are boisterous there, Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.
Is this your promise? go to, hold your tongue.
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes: Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert; Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue, So I may keep mine eyes: O, spare mine eyes. Though to no use but still to look on you! Lo, by my truth, the instrument is cold And would not harm me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I can heat it, boy.
No, in good sooth: the fire is dead with grief, Being create for comfort, to be used In undeserved extremes: see else yourself; There is no malice in this burning coal; The breath of heaven has blown his spirit out And strew'd repentent ashes on his head.
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
An if you do, you will but make it blush And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert: Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes; And like a dog that is compell'd to fight, Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on. All things that you should use to do me wrong Deny their office: only you do lack That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends, Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.
Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye For all the treasure that thine uncle owes: Yet am I sworn and I did purpose, boy, With this same very iron to burn them out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, now you look like Hubert! all this whileYou were disguised.
Peace; no more. Adieu. Your uncle must not know but you are dead; I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports: And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure, That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world, Will not offend thee.
O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.
Silence; no more: go closely in with me:Much danger do I undergo for thee.
Here once again we sit, once again crown'd,And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This 'once again,' but that your highness pleased, Was once superfluous: you were crown'd before, And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off, The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt; Fresh expectation troubled not the land With any long'd-for change or better state.
Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp, To guard a title that was rich before, To gild refined gold, to paint the lily, To throw a perfume on the violet, To smooth the ice, or add another hue Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish, Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.
But that your royal pleasure must be done, This act is as an ancient tale new told, And in the last repeating troublesome, Being urged at a time unseasonable.
In this the antique and well noted face Of plain old form is much disfigured; And, like a shifted wind unto a sail, It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about, Startles and frights consideration, Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected, For putting on so new a fashion'd robe.
When workmen strive to do better than well, They do confound their skill in covetousness; And oftentimes excusing of a fault Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse, As patches set upon a little breach Discredit more in hiding of the fault Than did the fault before it was so patch'd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To this effect, before you were new crown'd, We breathed our counsel: but it pleased your highness To overbear it, and we are all well pleased, Since all and every part of what we would Doth make a stand at what your highness will.
Some reasons of this double coronation I have possess'd you with and think them strong; And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear, I shall indue you with: meantime but ask What you would have reform'd that is not well, And well shall you perceive how willingly I will both hear and grant you your requests.
Then I, as one that am the tongue of these, To sound the purpose of all their hearts, Both for myself and them, but, chief of all, Your safety, for the which myself and them Bend their best studies, heartily request The enfranchisement of Arthur; whose restraint Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent To break into this dangerous argument,— If what in rest you have in right you hold, Why then your fears, which, as they say, attend The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up Your tender kinsman and to choke his days With barbarous ignorance and deny his youth The rich advantage of good exercise? That the time's enemies may not have this To grace occasions, let it be our suit That you have bid us ask his liberty; Which for our goods we do no further ask Than whereupon our weal, on you depending, Counts it your weal he have his liberty.
Let it be so: I do commit his youthTo your direction. Hubert, what news with you?
This is the man should do the bloody deed; He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine: The image of a wicked heinous fault Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his Does show the mood of a much troubled breast; And I do fearfully believe 'tis done, What we so fear'd he had a charge to do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The colour of the king doth come and go Between his purpose and his conscience, Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set: His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thenceThe foul corruption of a sweet child's death.
We cannot hold mortality's strong hand: Good lords, although my will to give is living, The suit which you demand is gone and dead: He tells us Arthur is deceased to-night.
Indeed we fear'd his sickness was past cure.
Indeed we heard how near his death he wasBefore the child himself felt he was sick:This must be answer'd either here or hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?Think you I bear the shears of destiny?Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
It is apparent foul play; and 'tis shameThat greatness should so grossly offer it:So thrive it in your game! and so, farewell.
Stay yet, Lord Salisbury; I'll go with thee, And find the inheritance of this poor child, His little kingdom of a forced grave. That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle, Three foot of it doth hold: bad world the while! This must not be thus borne: this will break out To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.
They burn in indignation. I repent:There is no sure foundation set on blood,No certain life achieved by others' death.
A fearful eye thou hast: where is that blood That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks? So foul a sky clears not without a storm: Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From France to England. Never such a power For any foreign preparation Was levied in the body of a land. The copy of your speed is learn'd by them; For when you should be told they do prepare, The tidings come that they are all arrived.
O, where hath our intelligence been drunk? Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care, That such an army could be drawn in France, And she not hear of it?
My liege, her ear Is stopp'd with dust; the first of April died Your noble mother: and, as I hear, my lord, The Lady Constance in a frenzy died Three days before: but this from rumour's tongue I idly heard; if true or false I know not.
Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion! O, make a league with me, till I have pleased My discontented peers! What! mother dead! How wildly then walks my estate in France! Under whose conduct came those powers of France That thou for truth givest out are landed here?
Under the Dauphin.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast made me giddyWith these ill tidings.
Now, what says the worldTo your proceedings? do not seek to stuffMy head with more ill news, for it is full.
But if you be afeard to hear the worst,Then let the worst unheard fall on your bead.
Bear with me cousin, for I was amazed Under the tide: but now I breathe again Aloft the flood, and can give audience To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
How I have sped among the clergymen, The sums I have collected shall express. But as I travell'd hither through the land, I find the people strangely fantasied; Possess'd with rumours, full of idle dreams, Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear: And here a prophet, that I brought with me From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found With many hundreds treading on his heels; To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes, That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon, Your highness should deliver up your crown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.
Hubert, away with him; imprison him; And on that day at noon whereon he says I shall yield up my crown, let him be hang'd. Deliver him to safety; and return, For I must use thee.
O my gentle cousin,Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?
The French, my lord; men's mouths are full of it: Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury, With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire, And others more, going to seek the grave Of Arthur, who they say is kill'd to-night On your suggestion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentle kinsman, go, And thrust thyself into their companies: I have a way to win their loves again; Bring them before me.
I will seek them out.
Nay, but make haste; the better foot before. O, let me have no subject enemies, When adverse foreigners affright my towns With dreadful pomp of stout invasion! Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels, And fly like thought from them to me again.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman. Go after him; for he perhaps shall need Some messenger betwixt me and the peers; And be thou he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart, my liege.
My mother dead!
My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl aboutThe other four in wondrous motion.
Five moons!
Old men and beldams in the streets Do prophesy upon it dangerously: Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths: And when they talk of him, they shake their heads And whisper one another in the ear; And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist, Whilst he that hears makes fearful action, With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes. I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus, The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool, With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news; Who, with his shears and measure in his hand, Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet, Told of a many thousand warlike French That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent: Another lean unwash'd artificer Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur's death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears? Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death? Thy hand hath murder'd him: I had a mighty cause To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.
No had, my lord! why, did you not provoke me?
It is the curse of kings to be attended By slaves that take their humours for a warrant To break within the bloody house of life, And on the winking of authority To understand a law, to know the meaning Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns More upon humour than advised respect.
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal Witness against us to damnation! How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by, A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd, Quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame, This murder had not come into my mind: But taking note of thy abhorr'd aspect, Finding thee fit for bloody villany, Apt, liable to be employ'd in danger, I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death; And thou, to be endeared to a king, Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord—
Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause When I spake darkly what I purposed, Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face, As bid me tell my tale in express words, Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off, And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me: But thou didst understand me by my signs And didst in signs again parley with sin; Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent, And consequently thy rude hand to act The deed, which both our tongues held vile to name. Out of my sight, and never see me more! My nobles leave me; and my state is braved, Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers: Nay, in the body of this fleshly land, This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath, Hostility and civil tumult reigns Between my conscience and my cousin's death.
Arm you against your other enemies, I'll make a peace between your soul and you. Young Arthur is alive: this hand of mine Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand, Not painted with the crimson spots of blood. Within this bosom never enter'd yet The dreadful motion of a murderous thought; And you have slander'd nature in my form, Which, howsoever rude exteriorly, Is yet the cover of a fairer mind Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers, Throw this report on their incensed rage, And make them tame to their obedience! Forgive the comment that my passion made Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind, And foul imaginary eyes of blood Presented thee more hideous than thou art. O, answer not, but to my closet bring The angry lords with all expedient haste. I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast.
The wall is high, and yet will I leap down: Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not! There's few or none do know me: if they did, This ship-boy's semblance hath disguised me quite. I am afraid; and yet I'll venture it. If I get down, and do not break my limbs, I'll find a thousand shifts to get away: As good to die and go, as die and stay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O me! my uncle's spirit is in these stones:Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!
Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury:It is our safety, and we must embraceThis gentle offer of the perilous time.
Who brought that letter from the cardinal?
The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,Whose private with me of the Dauphin's loveIs much more general than these lines import.
To-morrow morning let us meet him then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or rather then set forward; for 'twill beTwo long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.
Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords!The king by me requests your presence straight.
The king hath dispossess'd himself of us: We will not line his thin bestained cloak With our pure honours, nor attend the foot That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks. Return and tell him so: we know the worst.
Whate'er you think, good words, I think, were best.
Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But there is little reason in your grief;Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.
Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.
'Tis true, to hurt his master, no man else.
This is the prison. What is he lies here?
O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Murder, as hating what himself hath done,Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.
Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave,Found it too precious-princely for a grave.
Sir Richard, what think you? have you beheld, Or have you read or heard? or could you think? Or do you almost think, although you see, That you do see? could thought, without this object, Form such another? This is the very top, The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest, Of murder's arms: this is the bloodiest shame, The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke, That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
All murders past do stand excused in this: And this, so sole and so unmatchable, Shall give a holiness, a purity, To the yet unbegotten sin of times; And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest, Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
It is a damned and a bloody work;The graceless action of a heavy hand,If that it be the work of any hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If that it be the work of any hand! We had a kind of light what would ensue: It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand; The practise and the purpose of the king: From whose obedience I forbid my soul, Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life, And breathing to his breathless excellence The incense of a vow, a holy vow, Never to taste the pleasures of the world, Never to be infected with delight, Nor conversant with ease and idleness, Till I have set a glory to this hand, By giving it the worship of revenge .
Our souls religiously confirm thy words.
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you:Arthur doth live; the king hath sent for you.
O, he is old and blushes not at death.Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!
I am no villain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Must I rob the law?
Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again.
Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.
Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say; By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours: I would not have you, lord, forget yourself, Nor tempt the danger of my true defence; Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget Your worth, your greatness and nobility.
Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a nobleman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not for my life: but yet I dare defendMy innocent life against an emperor.
Thou art a murderer.
Do not prove me so;Yet I am none: whose tongue soe'er speaks false,Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.
Cut him to pieces.
Keep the peace, I say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.
Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury: If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot, Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame, I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime; Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron, That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?Second a villain and a murderer?
Lord Bigot, I am none.
Who kill'd this prince?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis not an hour since I left him well:I honour'd him, I loved him, and will weepMy date of life out for his sweet life's loss.
Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes, For villany is not without such rheum; And he, long traded in it, makes it seem Like rivers of remorse and innocency. Away with me, all you whose souls abhor The uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house; For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!
There tell the king he may inquire us out.
Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work?Beyond the infinite and boundless reachOf mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,Art thou damn'd, Hubert.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do but hear me, sir.
Ha! I'll tell thee what; Thou'rt damn'd as black—nay, nothing is so black; Thou art more deep damn'd than Prince Lucifer: There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.
Upon my soul—
If thou didst but consent To this most cruel act, do but despair; And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread That ever spider twisted from her womb Will serve to strangle thee, a rush will be a beam To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself, Put but a little water in a spoon, And it shall be as all the ocean, Enough to stifle such a villain up. I do suspect thee very grievously.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought, Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath Which was embounded in this beauteous clay, Let hell want pains enough to torture me. I left him well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, bear him in thine arms. I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way Among the thorns and dangers of this world. How easy dost thou take all England up! From forth this morsel of dead royalty, The life, the right and truth of all this realm Is fled to heaven; and England now is left To tug and scamble and to part by the teeth The unowed interest of proud-swelling state. Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace: Now powers from home and discontents at home Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits, As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast, The imminent decay of wrested pomp. Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child And follow me with speed: I'll to the king: A thousand businesses are brief in hand, And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.
Thus have I yielded up into your handThe circle of my glory.
Take againFrom this my hand, as holding of the popeYour sovereign greatness and authority.
Now keep your holy word: go meet the French, And from his holiness use all your power To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed. Our discontented counties do revolt; Our people quarrel with obedience, Swearing allegiance and the love of soul To stranger blood, to foreign royalty. This inundation of mistemper'd humour Rests by you only to be qualified: Then pause not; for the present time's so sick, That present medicine must be minister'd, Or overthrow incurable ensues.
It was my breath that blew this tempest up, Upon your stubborn usage of the pope; But since you are a gentle convertite, My tongue shall hush again this storm of war And make fair weather in your blustering land. On this Ascension-day, remember well, Upon your oath of service to the pope, Go I to make the French lay down their arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet Say that before Ascension-day at noon My crown I should give off? Even so I have: I did suppose it should be on constraint: But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary.
All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out But Dover castle: London hath received, Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers: Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone To offer service to your enemy, And wild amazement hurries up and down The little number of your doubtful friends.
Would not my lords return to me again,After they heard young Arthur was alive?
They found him dead and cast into the streets,An empty casket, where the jewel of lifeBy some damn'd hand was robb'd and ta'en away.
That villain Hubert told me he did live.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew. But wherefore do you droop? why look you sad? Be great in act, as you have been in thought; Let not the world see fear and sad distrust Govern the motion of a kingly eye: Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire; Threaten the threatener and outface the brow Of bragging horror: so shall inferior eyes, That borrow their behaviors from the great, Grow great by your example and put on The dauntless spirit of resolution. Away, and glister like the god of war, When he intendeth to become the field: Show boldness and aspiring confidence. What, shall they seek the lion in his den, And fright him there? and make him tremble there? O, let it not be said: forage, and run To meet displeasure farther from the doors, And grapple with him ere he comes so nigh.
The legate of the pope hath been with me, And I have made a happy peace with him; And he hath promised to dismiss the powers Led by the Dauphin.
O inglorious league! Shall we, upon the footing of our land, Send fair-play orders and make compromise, Insinuation, parley and base truce To arms invasive? shall a beardless boy, A cocker'd silken wanton, brave our fields, And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil, Mocking the air with colours idly spread, And find no cheque? Let us, my liege, to arms: Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace; Or if he do, let it at least be said They saw we had a purpose of defence.
Have thou the ordering of this present time.
Away, then, with good courage! yet, I know,Our party may well meet a prouder foe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord Melun, let this be copied out, And keep it safe for our remembrance: Return the precedent to these lords again; That, having our fair order written down, Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes, May know wherefore we took the sacrament And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
Upon our sides it never shall be broken. And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith To your proceedings; yet believe me, prince, I am not glad that such a sore of time Should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt, And heal the inveterate canker of one wound By making many. O, it grieves my soul, That I must draw this metal from my side To be a widow-maker! O, and there Where honourable rescue and defence Cries out upon the name of Salisbury! But such is the infection of the time, That, for the health and physic of our right, We cannot deal but with the very hand Of stern injustice and confused wrong. And is't not pity, O my grieved friends, That we, the sons and children of this isle, Were born to see so sad an hour as this; Wherein we step after a stranger march Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up Her enemies' ranks,—I must withdraw and weep Upon the spot of this enforced cause,— To grace the gentry of a land remote, And follow unacquainted colours here? What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove! That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about, Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself, And grapple thee unto a pagan shore; Where these two Christian armies might combine The blood of malice in a vein of league, And not to spend it so unneighbourly!
A noble temper dost thou show in this; And great affections wrestling in thy bosom Doth make an earthquake of nobility. O, what a noble combat hast thou fought Between compulsion and a brave respect! Let me wipe off this honourable dew, That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks: My heart hath melted at a lady's tears, Being an ordinary inundation; But this effusion of such manly drops, This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul, Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven Figured quite o'er with burning meteors. Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury, And with a great heart heave away the storm: Commend these waters to those baby eyes That never saw the giant world enraged; Nor met with fortune other than at feasts, Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping. Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep Into the purse of rich prosperity As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all, That knit your sinews to the strength of mine. And even there, methinks, an angel spake:
Look, where the holy legate comes apace, To give us warrant from the hand of heaven And on our actions set the name of right With holy breath.
Hail, noble prince of France! The next is this, King John hath reconciled Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in, That so stood out against the holy church, The great metropolis and see of Rome: Therefore thy threatening colours now wind up; And tame the savage spirit of wild war, That like a lion foster'd up at hand, It may lie gently at the foot of peace, And be no further harmful than in show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back: I am too high-born to be propertied, To be a secondary at control, Or useful serving-man and instrument, To any sovereign state throughout the world. Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars Between this chastised kingdom and myself, And brought in matter that should feed this fire; And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out With that same weak wind which enkindled it. You taught me how to know the face of right, Acquainted me with interest to this land, Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart; And come ye now to tell me John hath made His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me? I, by the honour of my marriage-bed, After young Arthur, claim this land for mine; And, now it is half-conquer'd, must I back Because that John hath made his peace with Rome? Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne, What men provided, what munition sent, To underprop this action? Is't not I That undergo this charge? who else but I, And such as to my claim are liable, Sweat in this business and maintain this war? Have I not heard these islanders shout out 'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns? Have I not here the best cards for the game, To win this easy match play'd for a crown? And shall I now give o'er the yielded set? No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
You look but on the outside of this work.
Outside or inside, I will not return Till my attempt so much be glorified As to my ample hope was promised Before I drew this gallant head of war, And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world, To outlook conquest and to win renown Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?
According to the fair play of the world, Let me have audience; I am sent to speak: My holy lord of Milan, from the king I come, to learn how you have dealt for him; And, as you answer, I do know the scope And warrant limited unto my tongue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,And will not temporize with my entreaties;He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
By all the blood that ever fury breathed, The youth says well. Now hear our English king; For thus his royalty doth speak in me. He is prepared, and reason too he should: This apish and unmannerly approach, This harness'd masque and unadvised revel, This unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops, The king doth smile at; and is well prepared To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms, From out the circle of his territories. That hand which had the strength, even at your door, To cudgel you and make you take the hatch, To dive like buckets in concealed wells, To crouch in litter of your stable planks, To lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks, To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake Even at the crying of your nation's crow, Thinking his voice an armed Englishman; Shall that victorious hand be feebled here, That in your chambers gave you chastisement? No: know the gallant monarch is in arms And like an eagle o'er his aery towers, To souse annoyance that comes near his nest. And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts, You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb Of your dear mother England, blush for shame; For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids Like Amazons come tripping after drums, Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change, Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts To fierce and bloody inclination.
There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace; We grant thou canst outscold us: fare thee well; We hold our time too precious to be spent With such a brabbler.
Give me leave to speak.
No, I will speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will attend to neither.Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of warPlead for our interest and our being here.
Indeed your drums, being beaten, will cry out; And so shall you, being beaten: do but start An echo with the clamour of thy drum, And even at hand a drum is ready braced That shall reverberate all as loud as thine; Sound but another, and another shall As loud as thine rattle the welkin's ear And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder: for at hand, Not trusting to this halting legate here, Whom he hath used rather for sport than need Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits A bare-ribb'd death, whose office is this day To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.
And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt.
How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Badly, I fear. How fares your majesty?
This fever, that hath troubled me so long,Lies heavy on me; O, my heart is sick!
My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,Desires your majesty to leave the fieldAnd send him word by me which way you go.
Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
Be of good comfort; for the great supply That was expected by the Dauphin here, Are wreck'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands. This news was brought to Richard but even now: The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay me! this tyrant fever burns me up, And will not let me welcome this good news. Set on toward Swinstead: to my litter straight; Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.
I did not think the king so stored with friends.
Up once again; put spirit in the French:If they miscarry, we miscarry too.
That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
They say King John sore sick hath left the field.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lead me to the revolts of England here.
When we were happy we had other names.
It is the Count Melun.
Wounded to death.
Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold; Unthread the rude eye of rebellion And welcome home again discarded faith. Seek out King John and fall before his feet; For if the French be lords of this loud day, He means to recompense the pains you take By cutting off your heads: thus hath he sworn And I with him, and many moe with me, Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury; Even on that altar where we swore to you Dear amity and everlasting love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May this be possible? may this be true?
Have I not hideous death within my view, Retaining but a quantity of life, Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire? What in the world should make me now deceive, Since I must lose the use of all deceit? Why should I then be false, since it is true That I must die here and live hence by truth? I say again, if Lewis do win the day, He is forsworn, if e'er those eyes of yours Behold another day break in the east: But even this night, whose black contagious breath Already smokes about the burning crest Of the old, feeble and day-wearied sun, Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire, Paying the fine of rated treachery Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives, If Lewis by your assistance win the day. Commend me to one Hubert with your king: The love of him, and this respect besides, For that my grandsire was an Englishman, Awakes my conscience to confess all this. In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence From forth the noise and rumour of the field, Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts In peace, and part this body and my soul With contemplation and devout desires.
We do believe thee: and beshrew my soul But I do love the favour and the form Of this most fair occasion, by the which We will untread the steps of damned flight, And like a bated and retired flood, Leaving our rankness and irregular course, Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd And cabby run on in obedience Even to our ocean, to our great King John. My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence; For I do see the cruel pangs of death Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight; And happy newness, that intends old righ t.
The sun of heaven methought was loath to set, But stay'd and made the western welkin blush, When English measure backward their own ground In faint retire. O, bravely came we off, When with a volley of our needless shot, After such bloody toil, we bid good night; And wound our tattering colours clearly up, Last in the field, and almost lords of it!
Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here: what news?
The Count Melun is slain; the English lords By his persuasion are again fall'n off, And your supply, which you have wish'd so long, Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.
Ah, foul shrewd news! beshrew thy very heart! I did not think to be so sad to-night As this hath made me. Who was he that said King John did fly an hour or two before The stumbling night did part our weary powers?
Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.
Well; keep good quarter and good care to-night:The day shall not be up so soon as I,To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who's there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.
A friend. What art thou?
Of the part of England.
Whither dost thou go?
What's that to thee? why may not I demandOf thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hubert, I think?
Thou hast a perfect thought: I will upon all hazards well believe Thou art my friend, that know'st my tongue so well. Who art thou?
Who thou wilt: and if thou please,Thou mayst befriend me so much as to thinkI come one way of the Plantagenets.
Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night Have done me shame: brave soldier, pardon me, That any accent breaking from thy tongue Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,To find you out.
Brief, then; and what's the news?
O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,Black, fearful, comfortless and horrible.
Show me the very wound of this ill news:I am no woman, I'll not swoon at it.
The king, I fear, is poison'd by a monk: I left him almost speechless; and broke out To acquaint you with this evil, that you might The better arm you to the sudden time, Than if you had at leisure known of this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How did he take it? who did taste to him?
A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,Whose bowels suddenly burst out: the kingYet speaks and peradventure may recover.
Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?
Why, know you not? the lords are all come back, And brought Prince Henry in their company; At whose request the king hath pardon'd them, And they are all about his majesty.
Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven, And tempt us not to bear above our power! I'll tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night, Passing these flats, are taken by the tide; These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped.Away before: conduct me to the king;I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is too late: the life of all his blood Is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain, Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house, Doth by the idle comments that it makes Foretell the ending of mortality.
His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief That, being brought into the open air, It would allay the burning quality Of that fell poison which assaileth him.
Let him be brought into the orchard here.Doth he still rage?
He is more patientThan when you left him; even now he sung.
O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes In their continuance will not feel themselves. Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts, Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds With many legions of strange fantasies, Which, in their throng and press to that last hold, Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death should sing. I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan, Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death, And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings His soul and body to their lasting rest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be of good comfort, prince; for you are bornTo set a form upon that indigestWhich he hath left so shapeless and so rude.
Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room; It would not out at windows nor at doors. There is so hot a summer in my bosom, That all my bowels crumble up to dust: I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen Upon a parchment, and against this fire Do I shrink up.
How fares your majesty?
Poison'd,—ill fare—dead, forsook, cast off: And none of you will bid the winter come To thrust his icy fingers in my maw, Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much, I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait And so ingrateful, you deny me that.
O that there were some virtue in my tears,That might relieve you!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The salt in them is hot. Within me is a hell; and there the poison Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize On unreprievable condemned blood.
O, I am scalded with my violent motion,And spleen of speed to see your majesty!
O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye: The tackle of my heart is crack'd and burn'd, And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail Are turned to one thread, one little hair: My heart hath one poor string to stay it by, Which holds but till thy news be uttered; And then all this thou seest is but a clod And module of confounded royalty.
The Dauphin is preparing hitherward, Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him; For in a night the best part of my power, As I upon advantage did remove, Were in the Washes all unwarily Devoured by the unexpected flood.
You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.My liege! my lord! but now a king, now thus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even so must I run on, and even so stop.What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,When this was now a king, and now is clay?
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind To do the office for thee of revenge, And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven, As it on earth hath been thy servant still. Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres, Where be your powers? show now your mended faiths, And instantly return with me again, To push destruction and perpetual shame Out of the weak door of our fainting land. Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought; The Dauphin rages at our very heels.
It seems you know not, then, so much as we: The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest, Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin, And brings from him such offers of our peace As we with honour and respect may take, With purpose presently to leave this wa r.
He will the rather do it when he seesOurselves well sinewed to our defence.
Nay, it is in a manner done already; For many carriages he hath dispatch'd To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel To the disposing of the cardinal: With whom yourself, myself and other lords, If you think meet, this afternoon will post To consummate this business happily.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let it be so: and you, my noble prince,With other princes that may best be spared,Shall wait upon your father's funeral.
At Worcester must his body be interr'd;For so he will'd it.
Thither shall it then: And happily may your sweet self put on The lineal state and glory of the land! To whom with all submission, on my knee I do bequeath my faithful services And true subjection everlastingly.
And the like tender of our love we make,To rest without a spot for evermore.
I have a kind soul that would give you thanksAnd knows not how to do it but with tears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, let us pay the time but needful woe, Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs. This England never did, nor never shall, Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror, But when it first did help to wound itself. Now these her princes are come home again, Come the three corners of the world in arms, And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue, If England to itself do rest but true.
I thought the king had more affected the Duke of Albanythan Cornwall.
It did always seem so to us. But now in the division ofthe kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most, for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.
[indicating EDMUND ] Is not this your son, my lord?
His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazed toit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot conceive you.
Sir, this young fellow’s mother could, whereupon she grew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell afault?
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.
But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year olderthan this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came something saucily to the world before hewas sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged.— Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmund?
No, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honorable friend.
My services to your lordship.
I must love you and sue to know you better.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king is coming.
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
I shall, my lord.
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.— Give me the map there.— Know that we have divided In three our kingdom, and ’tis our fast intent To shake all cares and business from our age, Conferring them on younger strengths while we Unburdened crawl toward death.— Our son of Cornwall, And you, our no less loving son of Albany, We have this hour a constant will to publish Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife May be prevented now. The two great princes, France and Burgundy, Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love, Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn, And here are to be answered.— Tell me, my daughters, (Since now we will divest us both of rule, Interest of territory, cares of state) Which of you shall we say doth love us most That we our largest bounty may extend Where nature doth with merit challenge?— G oneril, Our eldest born, speak first.
Sir, I do love you more than words can wield the matter, Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty, Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare, No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor, As much as child e'er loved or father found— A love that makes breath poor and speech unable. Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this, With shadowy forests and with champains riched, With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads, We make thee lady. To thine and Albany’s issue Be this perpetual.—What says our second daughter, Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.
Sir, I am made of that self mettle as my sister, And prize me at her worth. In my true heart, I find she names my very deed of love— Only she comes too short, that I profess Myself an enemy to all other joys, Which the most precious square of sense possesses. And find I am alone felicitate In your dear highness' love.
[Aside] Then poor Cordelia!And yet not so, since I am sure my love’sMore ponderous than my tongue.
To thee and thine hereditary ever Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, No less in space, validity, and pleasure Than that conferred on Goneril.— But now, our joy, Although our last and least, to whose young love The vines of France and milk of Burgundy Strive to be interessed. What can you say to draw A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing, my lord.
Nothing?
Nothing.
How? Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heaveMy heart into my mouth. I love your majestyAccording to my bond, no more nor less.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,Lest you may mar your fortunes.
Good my lord, You have begot me, bred me, loved me. I Return those duties back as are right fit— Obey you, love you, and most honor you. Why have my sisters husbands if they say They love you all? Haply when I shall wed That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry Half my love with him, half my care and duty. Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters, To love my father all.
But goes thy heart with this?
Ay, good my lord.
So young and so untender?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So young, my lord, and true.
Let it be so. Thy truth then be thy dower. For by the sacred radiance of the sun, The mysteries of Hecate and the night, By all the operation of the orbs From whom we do exist and cease to be— Here I disclaim all my paternal care, Propinquity, and property of blood, And as a stranger to my heart and me Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian, Or he that makes his generation messes To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom Be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved As thou my sometime daughter.
Good my liege—
Peace, Kent. Come not between the dragon and his wrath. I loved her most and thought to set my rest On her kind nursery. [To CORDELIA] Hence, and avoid my sight!— So be my grave my peace as here I give Her father’s heart from her.— Call France. Who stirs? Call Burgundy.—
Cornwall and Albany, With my two daughters' dowers digest this third. Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her. I do invest you jointly with my power, Preeminence, and all the large effects That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course, With reservation of an hundred knights By you to be sustained, shall our abode Make with you by due turns. Only shall we retain The name, and all th' additions to a king. The sway, revenue, execution of the rest, Belovèd sons, be yours; which to confirm, This coronet part between you. [Gives CORNWALL and ALBANY the coronet]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Royal Lear, Whom I have ever honored as my king, Loved as my father, as my master followed, As my great patron thought on in my prayers—
The bow is bent and drawn. Make from the shaft.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man? Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak When power to flattery bows? To plainness honor’s bound When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state, And in thy best consideration check This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment, Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least, Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound Reverbs no hollowness.
Kent, on thy life, no more.
My life I never held but as a pawn To wage against thy enemies , nor fear to lose it, Thy safety being motive.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Out of my sight!
See better, Lear, and let me still remainThe true blank of thine eye.
Now, by Apollo—
Now, by Apollo, King,Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.
O vassal! Miscreant!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dear sir, forbear!
Do, kill thy physician, and the fee bestow Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy gift, Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat, I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.
Hear me, recreant! On thine allegiance hear me. That thou hast sought to make us break our vows, Which we durst never yet, and with strained pride To come betwixt our sentence and our power, Which nor our nature nor our place can bear, Our potency made good, take thy reward: Five days we do allot thee for provision To shield thee from diseases of the world. And on the sixth to turn thy hated back Upon our kingdom. If on the next day following Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions, The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter, This shall not be revoked.
Why, fare thee well, King. Sith thus thou wilt appear, Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here. [To CORDELIA] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid, That justly think’st and hast most rightly said! [To REGAN and GONERIL] And your large speeches may your deeds approve, That good effects may spring from words of love.— Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu. He’ll shape his old course in a country new.
Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord of Burgundy. We first address towards you, who with this king Hath rivaled for our daughter. What in the least Will you require in present dower with her Or cease your quest of love?
Most royal majesty, I crave no more than hath your highness offered.Nor will you tender less.
Right noble Burgundy, When she was dear to us we did hold her so, But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands. If aught within that little seeming substance, Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced And nothing more, may fitly like your grace, She’s there, and she is yours.
I know no answer.
Sir, will you, with those infirmities she owes— Unfriended, new adopted to our hate, Dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath— Take her or leave her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon me, royal sir.Election makes not up in such conditions.
Then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me, I tell you all her wealth. [To FRANCE] For you, great King, I would not from your love make such a stray To match you where I hate. Therefore beseech you T' avert your liking a more worthier way Than on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed Almost t' acknowledge hers.
This is most strange, That she that even but now was your best object— The argument of your praise, balm of your age, Most best, most dearest— should in this trice of time Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle So many folds of favor. Sure, her offense Must be of such unnatural degree That monsters it (or your fore-vouched affection Fall into taint), which to believe of her Must be a faith that reason without miracle Could never plant in me.
[To LEAR] I yet beseech your majesty, If for I want that glib and oily art To speak and purpose not— since what I well intend, I’ll do ’t before I speak— that you make known It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness, No unchaste action or dishonored step That hath deprived me of your grace and favor, But even for want of that for which I am richer: A still-soliciting eye and such a tongue As I am glad I have not, though not to have it Hath lost me in your liking.
Go to, go to. Better thou Hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me better.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it no more but this—a tardiness in nature Which often leaves the history unspoke That it intends to do?— My lord of Burgundy, What say you to the lady? Love’s not love When it is mingled with regards that stands Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her? She is herself a dowry.
[To LEAR] Royal King, Give but that portion which yourself proposed, And here I take Cordelia by the hand, Duchess of Burgundy.
Nothing. I have sworn. I am firm.
[To CORDELIA] I am sorry then. You have so lost a fatherThat you must lose a husband.
Peace be with Burgundy.Since that respects and fortunes are his love, I shall not be his wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor, Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised! Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon, Be it lawful I take up what’s cast away. Gods, gods! 'Tis strange that from their cold’st neglect My love should kindle to inflamed respect.— Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance, Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France. Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.— Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind. Thou losest here, a better where to find.
Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see That face of hers again. [To CORDELIA] Therefore be gone Without our grace, our love, our benison.— Come, noble Burgundy.
Bid farewell to your sisters.
The jewels of our father, with washed eyes Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are, And like a sister am most loath to call Your faults as they are named. Love well our father. To your professèd bosoms I commit him. But yet, alas, stood I within his grace, I would prefer him to a better place. So farewell to you both.
Prescribe not us our duty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let your study Be to content your lord, who hath received you At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted, And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,Who covers faults at last with shame derides.Well may you prosper.
Come, my fair Cordelia.
Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.
That’s most certain, and with you. Next month with us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You see how full of changes his age is. The observationwe have made of it hath not been little. He always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off appears too grossly.
'Tis the infirmity of his age. Yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash. Then must we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s banishment.
There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and him. Pray you, let’s sit together. If our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We shall further think on ’t.
We must do something, and i' th' heat.
Thou, nature, art my goddess. To thy law My services are bound. Wherefore should I Stand in the plague of custom and permit The curiosity of nations to deprive me For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines Lag of a brother? Why “bastard?” Wherefore “base?” When my dimensions are as well compact, My mind as generous, and my shape as true As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us With “base,” with “baseness,” “bastardy,” “base,” “base”— Who in the lusty stealth of nature take More composition and fierce quality Than doth within a dull, stale, tirèd bed Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops Got ’tween a sleep and wake? Well then, Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land. Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund As to the legitimate.— Fine word, “legitimate!”— Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed And my invention thrive, Edmund the base Shall top th' legitimate. I grow, I prosper. Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
Kent banished thus? And France in choler parted? And the king gone tonight, prescribed his power Confined to exhibition? All this done Upon the gad?—Edmund, how now? What news?
[pocketing the letter] So please your lordship, none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
I know no news, my lord.
What paper were you reading?
Nothing, my lord.
No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come, if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother that I have not all o'er-read. And for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
Give me the letter, sir.
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.
[taking the letter] Let’s see, let’s see.
I hope, for my brother’s justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reads] “This policy and reverence of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppressionof aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue forever, and live the beloved of your brother, Edgar.” Hum, conspiracy? “'Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half his revenue”—my son Edgar? Had he a hand to write this, a heart and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
It was not brought me, my lord. There’s the cunning of it.I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
You know the character to be your brother’s?
If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his.But in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.
It is his.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is not inthe contents.
Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?
Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it tobe fit that, sons at perfect age and fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain—worse than brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I’ll apprehend him. Abominable villain! Where is he?
I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you tosuspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain course— where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honor and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life forhim that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honor and to no other pretense of danger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Think you so?
If your honor judge it meet, I will place you where youshall hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction—and that without any further delay than this very evening.
He cannot be such a monster—
Nor is not, sure.
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out, wind me into him, I pray you. Frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business asI shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no goodto us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide, in cities mutinies, in countries discord, in palaces treason, and the bond cracked ’twixtson and father. This villain of mine comes under the prediction—there’s son against father. The king falls from bias of nature—there’s father against child. We have seen the best of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out this villain, Edmund. It shall lose thee nothing. Do it carefully.—Andthe noble and true-hearted Kent banished, his offense honesty! 'Tis strange, strange.
This is the excellent foppery of the world that when weare sick in fortune—often the surfeit of our own behavior—we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if we were villains by necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting-on. An admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father compounded with my mother under the dragon’s tail and my nativity was underUrsa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut, I should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar—
and pat on ’s cue he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My cue is villainous melancholy, with a sighlike Tom o' Bedlam. Oh, these eclipses do portend thesedivisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation areyou in?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
Do you busy yourself about that?
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily — as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
Come, come. When saw you my father last?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, the night gone by.
Spake you with him?
Ay, two hours together.
Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?
None at all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him. And at my entreaty forbear his presence till some littletime hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would scarcely allay.
Some villain hath done me wrong.
That’s my fear. I pray you, have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower. And as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak. Pray ye, go.There’s my key. If you do stir abroad, go armed.
Armed, brother?
Brother, I advise you to the best. Go armed. I am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you. I have told you what I have seen and heard—but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. Pray you, away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I hear from you anon?
I do serve you in this business.
A credulous father, and a brother noble— Whose nature is so far from doing harms That he suspects none, on whose foolish honesty My practices ride easy. I see the business. Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit. All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.
Did my father strike my gentlemanFor chiding of his fool?
Ay, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour He flashes into one gross crime or other That sets us all at odds. I’ll not endure it. His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us On every trifle. When he returns from hunting, I will not speak with him. Say I am sick. If you come slack of former services, You shall do well. The fault of it I’ll answer.
He’s coming, madam. I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence you please, You and your fellow servants. I’ll have it come to question. If he distaste it, let him to our sister, Whose mind and mine I know in that are one, Not to be overruled. Idle old man That still would manage those authorities That he hath given away! Now by my life, Old fools are babes again and must be used With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused. Remember what I have said.
Very well, madam.
And let his knights have colder looks among you. What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so. I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall, That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister To hold my very course. Go, prepare for dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If but as well I other accents borrow, That can my speech diffuse, my good intent May carry through itself to that full issue For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent, If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned, So may it come thy master, whom thou lovest, Shall find thee full of labors.
Let me not stay a jot for dinner. Go get it ready.
[To KENT] How now, what art thou?
A man, sir.
What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do profess to be no less than I seem—to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot choose,and to eat no fish.
What art thou?
A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
If thou beest as poor for a subject as he’s for a king,thou'rt poor enough. What wouldst thou?
Service.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who wouldst thou serve?
You.
Dost thou know me, fellow?
No, sir. But you have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.
What’s that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Authority.
What services canst thou do?
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in.And the best of me is diligence.
How old art thou?
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for anything. I have years on my backforty- eight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Follow me. Thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worseafter dinner, I will not part from thee yet.—Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave, my fool?—Go you, and call my fool hither.
You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?
So please you—
What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
Where’s my fool, ho? I think the world’s asleep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now? Where’s that mongrel?
He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner he would not.
He would not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgment your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont. There’s a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the duke himself also, and your daughter.
Ha! Sayest thou so?
I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken—formy duty cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.
Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception. I have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretense and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into ’t. But where’s my fool? I have not seen him this two days.
Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much pined away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No more of that. I have noted it well. Go you and tell my daughter I would speak with her.
Go you, call hither my fool.
O you sir, you, come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
My lady’s father.
“My lady’s father?” My lord’s knave, your whoreson dog!You slave, you cur!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am none of these, my lord. I beseech your pardon.
Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal? [He strikes OSWALD ]
I’ll not be strucken, my lord.
[tripping OSWALD] Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
[To KENT] I thank thee, fellow. Thou servest me, and I’ll love thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To OSWALD] Come, sir, arise, away! I’ll teach you differences. Away, away. If you will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry. But away, go to. Have you wisdom? So.
Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee.
[gives KENT money] There’s earnest of thy service.
Let me hire him too.—Here’s my coxcomb. [offers KENT his cap]
How now, my pretty knave? How dost thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To KENT] Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
Why, Fool?
Why? For taking one’s part that’s out of favor. Nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly. There, take my coxcomb. Why, this fellow has banished two on ’s daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If thou follow him, thou mustneeds wear my coxcomb.— How now, nuncle? Would I had twocoxcombs and two daughters.
Why, my boy?
If I gave them all my living, I’d keep my coxcombs myself.There’s mine. Beg another of thy daughters.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take heed, sirrah—the whip.
Truth’s a dog that must to kennel. He must be whipped out, when Lady Brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
A pestilent gall to me!
Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.
Do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mark it, nuncle. Have more than thou showest, Speak less than thou knowest, Lend less than thou owest, Ride more than thou goest, Learn more than thou trowest, Set less than thou throwest, Leave thy drink and thy whore And keep in-a-door, And thou shalt have more Than two tens to a score.
This is nothing, Fool.
Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer. You gave me nothing for ’t.—Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
Why no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.
[To KENT] Prithee, tell him so much the rent of his land comes to. He will not believe a fool.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A bitter fool.
Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitterfool and a sweet fool?
No, lad. Teach me.
That lord that counseled thee To give away thy land, Come place him here by me. Do thou for him stand. The sweet and bitter fool Will presently appear— The one in motley here, The other found out there.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast born with.
This is not altogether fool, my lord.
No, faith, lords and great men will not let me. If I had a monopoly out, they would have part on ’t. And ladies too— they will not let me have all fool to myself; they’ll be snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I’ll give thee two crowns.
What two crowns shall they be?
Why—after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the meat—the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i' th' middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass o' th' back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in this, let himbe whipped that first finds it so. [Sings] Fools had ne'er less wit in a year, For wise men are grown foppish. They know not how their wits to wear, Their manners are so apish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers. For when thou gavest them the rod, and put’st down thine own breeches, [Sings] Then they for sudden joy did weep And I for sorrow sung, That such a king should play bo-peep And go the fools among. Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thyfool to lie. I would fain learn to lie.
An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt have me whipped for lying, and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind o' thing thana fool. And yet I would not be thee, nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.
How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on?Methinks you are too much of late i' th' frown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To LEAR] Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning. Now thou art an O withouta figure. I am better than thou art now. I am a fool. Thou art nothing. [To GONERIL] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum, He that keeps nor crust nor crumb, Weary of all, shall want some. [indicates LEAR] That’s a shelled peascod.
[To LEAR] Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool, But other of your insolent retinue Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth In rank and not-to-be-endurèd riots. Sir, I had thought by making this well known unto you To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful By what yourself too late have spoke and done That you protect this course and put it on By your allowance— which if you should, the fault Would not ’scape censure, nor the redresses sleep Which in the tender of a wholesome weal Might in their working do you that offense, Which else were shame, that then necessity Will call discreet proceeding.
For you know, nuncle, The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long, That it’s had it head bit off by it young. So out went the candle and we were left darkling.
Are you our daughter?
Come, sir, I would you would make use of that good wisdom Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away These dispositions that of late transform you From what you rightly are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.
Does any here know me? Why, this is not Lear. Doth Lear walk thus? Speak thus? Where are his eyes? Either his notion weakens, or his discernings Are lethargied. Ha, sleeping or waking? Sure, ’tis not so. Who is it that can tell me who I am?
Lear’s shadow.
I would learn that. For by the marksOf sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
Which they will make an obedient father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to GONERIL] Your name, fair gentlewoman?
This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savor Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you To understand my purposes aright. As you are old and reverend, should be wise. Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires, Men so disordered, so debauched and bold That this our court, infected with their manners, Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust Make it more like a tavern or a brothel Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak For instant remedy. Be then desired By her that else will take the thing she begs, A little to disquantity your train, And the remainder that shall still depend To be such men as may besort your age, Which know themselves and you.
Darkness and devils! Saddle my horses. Call my train together.— Degenerate bastard, I’ll not trouble thee. Yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people, and your disordered rabbleMake servants of their betters.
Woe that too late repents!— [To ALBANY] O sir, are you come? Is it your will? Speak, sir.—Prepare my horses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,More hideous when thou show’st thee in a childThan the sea monster.
Pray, sir, be patient.
[To GONERIL] Detested kite, thou liest! My train are men of choice and rarest parts That all particulars of duty know And in the most exact regard support The worships of their name. O most small fault, How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show, That, like an engine, wrenched my frame of nature From the fixed place, drew from heart all love, And added to the gall! O Lear, Lear, Lear! [strikes his head] Beat at this gate that let thy folly in And thy dear judgment out!—Go, go, my people.
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant,Of what hath moved you.
It may be so, my lord. Hear, Nature, hear, dear goddess, hear! Suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend To make this creature fruitful. Into her womb convey sterility. Dry up in her the organs of increase, And from her derogate body never spring A babe to honor her. If she must teem, Create her child of spleen, that it may live And be a thwart disnatured torment to her. Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks, Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits To laughter and contempt, that she may feel— That she may feel How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is To have a thankless child.— Away, away!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
Never afflict yourself to know more of it,But let his disposition have that scope That dotage gives it.
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?Within a fortnight?
What’s the matter, sir?
I’ll tell thee. [To GONERIL] Life and death! I am ashamed That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus, That these hot tears which break from me perforce Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee! Th' untented woundings of a father’s curse Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes, Beweep this cause again, I’ll pluck ye out And cast you, with the waters that you loose, To temper clay. Yea, is ’t come to this? Ha? Let it be so. I have another daughter, Who I am sure is kind and comfortable. When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think I have cast off for ever. Thou shalt, I warrant thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you mark that, my lord?
I cannot be so partial, Goneril, To the great love I bear you—
Pray you, content.Come, sire, no more.—What, Oswald, ho! [to FOOL] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool with thee. A fox when one has caught her And such a daughter Should sure to the slaughter, If my cap would buy a halter. So the fool follows after.
This man hath had good counsel—a hundred knights! 'Tis politic and safe to let him keep At point a hundred knights, yes, that on every dream, Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, He may enguard his dotage with their powers And hold our lives in mercy?— Oswald, I say!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, you may fear too far.
Safer than trust too far. Let me still take away the harms I fear, Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart. What he hath uttered I have writ my sister. If she sustain him and his hundred knights When I have showed th' unfitness—
Here, madam.
How now, Oswald?What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
Ay, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take you some company, and away to horse. Inform her full of my particular fear, And thereto add such reasons of your own As may compact it more. Get you gone And hasten your return.
No, no, my lord, This milky gentleness and course of yours Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon You are much more attasked for want of wisdom Than praised for harmful mildness.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell. Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.
Nay, then—
Well, well, th' event.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to KENT, giving him letters] Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
If a man’s brains were in ’s heels, were ’t not in danger of kibes?
Ay, boy.
Then, I prithee, be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slipshod.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha, ha!
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly. For though she’s as like this as a crab’s like an apple, yetI can tell what I can tell.
Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou canst tell why one’s nose stands i' th' middle on ’s face?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side ’s nose, that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
I did her wrong—
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
No.
Nor I neither. But I can tell why a snail has a house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why?
Why, to put ’s head in—not to give it away to his daughters and leave his horns without a case.
I will forget my nature. So kind a father!—Be my horsesready?
Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
Because they are not eight?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes indeed. Thou wouldst make a good fool.
To take ’t again perforce—Monster ingratitude!
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’d have thee beaten for being old before thy time.
How’s that?
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!I would not be mad.Keep me in temper. I would not be mad.
How now? Are the horses ready?
Ready, my lord.
Come, boy.
She that’s a maid now and laughs at my departure,Shall not be a maid long unless things be cut shorter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Save thee, Curan.
And you, sir. I have been with your father and given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his duchess will be here with him this night.
How comes that?
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad?—I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments.
Not I. Pray you, what are they?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have you heard of no likely wars toward ’twixt the twoDukes of Cornwall and Albany?
Not a word.
You may do then in time. Fare you well, sir.
The duke be here tonight? The better—best! This weaves itself perforce into my business. My father hath set guard to take my brother. And I have one thing, of a queasy question, Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!— Brother, a word. Descend, brother, I say.
My father watches. O sir, fly this place. Intelligence is given where you are hid. You have now the good advantage of the night. Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall aught? He’s coming hither—now, i' th' night, i' th' haste, And Regan with him. Have you nothing said Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany? Advise yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sure on ’t, not a word.
I hear my father coming. Pardon me. In cunning I must draw my sword upon you. Draw. Seem to defend yourself. Now quit you well.— [loudly] Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho! Here! [aside to EDGAR ] Fly, brother, fly. [loudly] Torches, torches! [aside to EDGAR ] So, farewell.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion Of my more fierce endeavor. [cuts his own arm] I have seen drunkards Do more than this in sport.— Father, father!— Stop, stop!—No help?
Now Edmund, where’s the villain?
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moonTo stand ’s auspicious mistress—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But where is he?
Look, sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could—
Pursue him, ho! Go after.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“By no means” what?
Persuade me to the murder of your lordship, But that I told him the revenging gods 'Gainst parricides did all the thunder bend, Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond The child was bound to th' father. Sir, in fine, Seeing how loathly opposite I stood To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion, With his preparèd sword he charges home My unprovided body, latched mine arm. And when he saw my best alarumed spirits, Bold in the quarrel’s right, roused to the encounter, Or whether ghasted by the noise I made, Full suddenly he fled.
Let him fly far. Not in this land shall he remain uncaught. And found—dispatch. The noble duke my master, My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight. By his authority I will proclaim it That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks, Bringing the murderous coward to the stake. He that conceals him, death.
When I dissuaded him from his intent, And found him pight to do it, with cursed speech I threatened to discover him. He replied, “Thou unpossessing bastard! Dost thou think If I would stand against thee, would the reposal Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee Make thy words faithed? No. What I should deny— As this I would, ay, though thou didst produce My very character—I’d turn it all To thy suggestion, plot, and damnèd practice. And thou must make a dullard of the world, If they not thought the profits of my death Were very pregnant and potential spirits To make thee seek it.”
O strange and fastened villain! Would he deny his letter, said he? I never got him.— Hark, the duke’s trumpets. I know not why he comes. All ports I’ll bar. The villain shall not ’scape. The duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture I will send far and near, that all the kingdom May have the due note of him.— And of my land, Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means To make thee capable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
O madam, my old heart is cracked, it’s cracked.
What, did my father’s godson seek your life?—He whom my father named, your Edgar?
O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was he not companion with the riotous knightsThat tend upon my father?
I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad.
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
No marvel then, though he were ill affected. 'Tis they have put him on the old man’s death, To have th' expense and spoil of his revenues. I have this present evening from my sister Been well informed of them—and with such cautions That if they come to sojourn at my house I’ll not be there.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.—Edmund, I hear that you have shown your fatherA childlike office.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It was my duty, sir.
He did bewray his practice, and receivedThis hurt you see striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
Ay, my good lord.
If he be taken, he shall never more Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose How in my strength you please.— For you, Edmund, Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant So much commend itself, you shall be ours. Natures of such deep trust we shall much need. You we first seize on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall serve you, sir,Truly, however else.
[to CORNWALL] For him I thank your grace.
You know not why we came to visit you—
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night. Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise, Wherein we must have use of your advice: Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister, Of differences, which I least thought it fit To answer from our home. The several messengers From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend, Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow Your needful counsel to our business, Which craves the instant use.
I serve you, madam. Your graces are right welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
Ay.
Where may we set our horses?
I' th' mire.
Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I love thee not.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Fellow, I know thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What dost thou know me for?
A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking knave; a whoreson, glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service; and art nothing but the composition of a knave,beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch; one whom I will beat into clamorous whining if thou deniest the least syllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up thy heels and beat thee before the king? Draw, you rogue, for though it be night yet the moon shines. I’ll make a sop o' th' moonshine of you. [draws his sword] Draw, youwhoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw!
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Draw, you rascal. You come with letters against the king and take Vanity the puppet’s part against the royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I’ll so carbonado your shanks. Draw, you rascal! Come your ways.
Help, ho! Murder! Help!
Strike, you slave. Stand, rogue. Stand, you neat slave, strike! [strikes OSWALD]
Help, ho! Murder, murder!
How now? What’s the matter? Part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to EDMUND] With you, goodman boy, if you please. Come,I’ll flesh ye. Come on, young master.
Weapons, arms? What’s the matter here?
Keep peace, upon your lives.He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
The messengers from our sister and the king.
What is your difference? Speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am scarce in breath, my lord.
No marvel, you have so bestirred your valor. You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee. A tailor madethee.
Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a man?
Ay, a tailor, sir. A stone-cutter or painter could nothave made him so ill though they had been but two yearso' th' trade.
Speak yet. How grew your quarrel?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his gray beard—
Thou whoreson zed, thou unnecessary letter!—My lord, ifyou will give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall of a jakes with him.—Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?
Peace, sirrah!You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
Why art thou angry?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That such a slave as this should wear a sword, Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these, Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain Which are too intrinse t' unloose, smooth every passion That in the natures of their lords rebel, Bring oil to fire, snow to the colder moods; Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks With every gale and vary of their masters, Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.— A plague upon your epileptic visage! Smile you my speeches as I were a fool? Goose, an I had you upon Sarum plain, I’d drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
[to KENT] How fell you out?Say that.
No contraries hold more antipathy Than I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him “knave?” What’s his offense?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His countenance likes me not.
No more perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers.
Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain. I have seen better faces in my time Than stands on any shoulder that I see Before me at this instant.
This is some fellow, Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect A saucy roughness and constrains the garb Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he. An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth. An they will take it, so. If not, he’s plain. These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness Harbor more craft and more corrupter ends Than twenty silly-ducking observants That stretch their duties nicely.
Sir, in good faith, or in sincere verity, Under th' allowance of your great aspect, Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire On flickering Phoebus' front—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What mean’st by this?
To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to ’t.
[to OSWALD] What was th' offense you gave him?
I never gave him any. It pleased the king his master very late To strike at me upon his misconstruction When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure, Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed, And put upon him such a deal of man That worthied him, got praises of the king For him attempting who was self-subdued. And in the fleshment of this dread exploit Drew on me here again.
None of these rogues and cowardsBut Ajax is their fool.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fetch forth the stocks, ho!—You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,We’ll teach you.
Sir, I am too old to learn. Call not your stocks for me. I serve the king, On whose employment I was sent to you. You shall do small respect, show too bold malice Against the grace and person of my master, Stocking his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks!As I have life and honor, there shall he sit till noon.
Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too.
Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,You should not use me so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, being his knave, I will.
This is a fellow of the selfsame colorOur sister speaks of.—Come, bring away the stocks!
Let me beseech your grace not to do so. His fault is much, and the good king his master Will check him for ’t. Your purposed low correction Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches For pilferings and most common trespasses Are punished with. The king his master needs must take it ill, That he, so slightly valued in his messenger, Should have him thus restrained.
I’ll answer that.
My sister may receive it much more worseTo have her gentleman abused, assaultedFor following her affairs.—Put in his legs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to GLOUCESTER ] Come, my good lord, away.
I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the duke’s pleasure, Whose disposition, all the world well knows,Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I’ll entreat for thee.
Pray you do not, sir. I have watched and traveled hard. Some time I shall sleep out. The rest I’ll whistle. A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels. Give you good morrow.
The duke’s to blame in this. 'Twill be ill taken.
Good King, that must approve the common saw, Thou out of heaven’s benediction comest To the warm sun. [takes out a letter] Approach, thou beacon to this underglobe, That by thy comfortable beams I may Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia, Who hath most fortunately been informed Of my obscurèd course and [reads the letter] “shall find time From this enormous state, seeking to give Losses their remedies.” All weary and o'erwatched, Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold This shameful lodging. Fortune, good night. Smile once more. Turn thy wheel. [sleeps]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I heard myself proclaimed, And by the happy hollow of a tree Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place That guard and most unusual vigilance Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may ’scape, I will preserve myself, and am bethought To take the basest and most poorest shape That ever penury in contempt of man Brought near to beast. My face I’ll grime with filth, Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots, And with presented nakedness outface The winds and persecutions of the sky. The country gives me proof and precedent Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary, And with this horrible object from low farms, Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills, Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers, Enforce their charity. “Poor Turlygod!” “Poor Tom!”— That’s something yet. Edgar I nothing am.
'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,And not send back my messenger.
As I learned,The night before there was no purpose in themOf this remove.
[to LEAR] Hail to thee, noble master!
Ha! Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my lord.
Ha, ha! Look, he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by theloins, and men by the legs. When a man’s overlusty at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.
[to KENT] What’s he that hath so much thy place mistookTo set thee here?
It is both he and she:Your son and daughter.
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes.
No, I say.
I say “Yea.”
No, no, they would not.
Yes, they have.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By Jupiter, I swear “No.”
By Juno, I swear “Ay.”
They durst not do ’t. They could not, would not do ’t. 'Tis worse than murder To do upon respect such violent outrage. Resolve me with all modest haste which way Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage, Coming from us.
My lord, when at their home I did commend your highness' letters to them. Ere I was risen from the place that showed My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post, Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth From Goneril his mistress salutations, Delivered letters spite of intermission, Which presently they read, on whose contents They summoned up their meiny, straight took horse, Commanded me to follow and attend The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks. And meeting here the other messenger, Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine— Being the very fellow which of late Displayed so saucily against your highness— Having more man than wit about me, drew. He raised the house with loud and coward cries. Your son and daughter found this trespass worth The shame which here it suffers.
Winter’s not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way. Fathers that wear rags Do make their children blind. But fathers that bear bags Shall see their children kind. Fortune, that arrant whore, Ne'er turns the key to th' poor. But for all this thou shalt have as many dolors for thydaughters as thou canst tell in a year.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, how this mother swells up toward my heart! Hysterica passio , down, thou climbing sorrow.Thy element’s below.—Where is this daughter?
With the earl, sir, here within.
Follow me not. Stay here.
Made you no more offense but what you speak of?
None.How chance the king comes with so small a train?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question, thou’dst well deserved it.
Why, Fool?
We’ll set thee to school to an ant to teach thee there’s no laboring i' th' winter. All that follow theirnoses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there’s not a nose among twenty but can smell him that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down ahill, lest it break thy neck with following it. But thegreat one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I would have none but knaves follow it since a fool gives it. That sir which serves and seeks for gain, And follows but for form, Will pack when it begins to rain And leave thee in the storm. But I will tarry. The fool will stay. And let the wise man fly. The knave turns fool that runs away; The fool, no knave, perdie.
Where learned you this, Fool?
Not i' th' stocks, fool.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Deny to speak with me? They are sick? They are weary? They have traveled all the night?—mere fetches, ay! The images of revolt and flying off. Fetch me a better answer.
My dear lord, You know the fiery quality of the duke, How unremoveable and fixed he is In his own course.
Vengeance, plague, death, confusion! “Fiery?” What “quality?” Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,I’d speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.
“Informed them?” Dost thou understand me, man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lord.
The king would speak with Cornwall. The dear father Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends service. Are they “informed” of this? My breath and blood! “Fiery?” The “fiery” duke? Tell the hot duke that Lear— No, but not yet. Maybe he is not well. Infirmity doth still neglect all office Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind To suffer with the body. I’ll forbear, And am fallen out with my more headier will To take the indisposed and sickly fit For the sound man. [notices KENT again] Death on my state! Wherefore Should he sit here? This act persuades me That this remotion of the duke and her Is practice only. Give me my servant forth. Go tell the duke and ’s wife I’d speak with them— Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me, Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum Till it cry sleep to death.
I would have all well betwixt you.
O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down.
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put 'em i' th' paste alive. She knapped 'em o' th' coxcombs with a stick and cried, “Down, wantons, down!” 'Twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to you both.
Hail to your grace.
I am glad to see your highness.
Regan, I think you are. I know what reason I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad, I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb, Sepulchring an adultress. [to KENT] Oh, are you free? Some other time for that.
Belovèd Regan, Thy sister’s naught. O Regan, she hath tied Sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here. [indicates his heart] I can scarce speak to thee. Thou'lt not believe With how depraved a quality— O Regan!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hopeYou less know how to value her desertThan she to scant her duty.
Say, how is that?
I cannot think my sister in the least Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance She have restrained the riots of your followers, 'Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end As clears her from all blame.
My curses on her!
O sir, you are old. Nature in you stands on the very verge Of his confine. You should be ruled and led By some discretion that discerns your state Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you That to our sister you do make return. Say you have wronged her, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ask her forgiveness? Do you but mark how this becomes the house?— [kneels] “Dear daughter, I confess that I am old. Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.”
Good sir, no more. These are unsightly tricks.Return you to my sister.
[rising] Never, Regan. She hath abated me of half my train, Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue, Most serpentlike, upon the very heart. All the stored vengeances of heaven fall On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones, You taking airs, with lameness!
Fie, sir, fie!
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty, You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun, To fall and blister!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O the blessed gods!So will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse. Thy tender-hafted nature shall not give Thee o'er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but thine Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes, And in conclusion to oppose the bolt Against my coming in. Thou better know’st The offices of nature, bond of childhood, Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude. Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot, Wherein I thee endowed.
Good sir, to the purpose.
Who put my man i' th' stocks?
What trumpet’s that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know ’t—my sister’s. This approves her letterThat she would soon be here. [to OSWALD] Is your lady come?
This is a slave whose easy borrowed pride Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.—Out, varlet, from my sight!
What means your grace?
Who stocked my servant? Regan, I have good hope Thou didst not know on ’t.—Who comes here? O heavens, If you do love old men, if your sweet sway Allow obedience, if yourselves are old, Make it your cause. Send down, and take my part! [to GONERIL ] Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?— O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?All’s not offense that indiscretion findsAnd dotage terms so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O sides, you are too tough.Will you yet hold?—How came my man i' th' stocks?
I set him there, sir, but his own disordersDeserved much less advancement.
You! Did you?
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so. If till the expiration of your month, You will return and sojourn with my sister, Dismissing half your train, come then to me. I am now from home, and out of that provision Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her, and fifty men dismissed? No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose To be a comrade with the wolf and owl— To wage against the enmity o' th' air— Necessity’s sharp pinch! Return with her? Why, the hot-blooded France that dowerless took Our youngest born— I could as well be brought To knee his throne, and, squirelike, pension beg To keep base life afoot. Return with her? Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter To this detested groom. [indicates OSWALD ]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At your choice, sir.
Now, I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad. I will not trouble thee, my child. Farewell. We’ll no more meet, no more see one another. But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter— Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh, Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil, A plague-sore or embossèd carbuncle In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee. Let shame come when it will. I do not call it. I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot, Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove. Mend when thou canst. Be better at thy leisure. I can be patient. I can stay with Regan, I and my hundred knights.
Not altogether so, sir. I looked not for you yet, nor am provided For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister. For those that mingle reason with your passion Must be content to think you old, and so— But she knows what she does.
Is this well spoken now?
I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers? Is it not well? What should you need of more— Yea, or so many— sith that both charge and danger Speak 'gainst so great a number? How, in one house, Should many people under two commands Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why might not you, my lord, receive attendanceFrom those that she calls servants, or from mine?
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you, We could control them. If you will come to me— For now I spy a danger— I entreat you To bring but five and twenty. To no more Will I give place or notice.
I gave you all—
And in good time you gave it.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries, But kept a reservation to be followed With such a number. What, must I come to you With five and twenty, Regan? Said you so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And speak ’t again, my lord. No more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well favored When others are more wicked. Not being the worst Stands in some rank of praise. [to GONERIL] I’ll go with thee. Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty, And thou art twice her love.
Hear me, my lord. What need you five and twenty, ten, or five To follow in a house where twice so many Have a command to tend you?
What need one?
O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars Are in the poorest thing superfluous. Allow not nature more than nature needs, Man’s life’s as cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady. If only to go warm were gorgeous, Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear’st, Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need— You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need. You see me here, you gods, a poor old man, As full of grief as age, wretched in both. If it be you that stir these daughters' hearts Against their father, fool me not so much To bear it tamely. Touch me with noble anger. And let not women’s weapons, water drops, Stain my man’s cheeks! No, you unnatural hags, I will have such revenges on you both That all the world shall— I will do such things— What they are yet I know not, but they shall be The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep? No, I’ll not weep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have full cause of weeping, but this heart Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws, Or ere I’ll weep.— O Fool, I shall go mad!
Let us withdraw. 'Twill be a storm.
This house is little. The old man and his peopleCannot be well bestowed.
'Tis his own blame. Hath put himself from rest,And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular I’ll receive him gladly,But not one follower.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So am I purposed.Where is my lord of Gloucester?
Followed the old man forth. He is returned.
The king is in high rage.
Whither is he going?
He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis best to give him way. He leads himself.
[to GLOUCESTER] My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack, the night comes on, and the high windsDo sorely ruffle. For many miles aboutThere’s scarce a bush.
O sir, to wilful men, The injuries that they themselves procure Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors. He is attended with a desperate train. And what they may incense him to, being apt To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors, my lord. 'Tis a wild night.My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s there, besides foul weather?
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
I know you. Where’s the king?
Contending with the fretful elements. Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea Or swell the curlèd water 'bove the main, That things might change or cease. Tears his white hair, Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage, Catch in their fury and make nothing of. Strives in his little world of man to outscorn The to-and-fro–conflicting wind and rain. This night—wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, The lion and the belly-pinchèd wolf Keep their fur dry—unbonneted he runs, And bids what will take all.
But who is with him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None but the fool, who labors to outjestHis heart-struck injuries.
Sir, I do know you, And dare upon the warrant of my note Commend a dear thing to you. There is division, Although as yet the face of it be covered With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall, Who have—as who have not that their great stars Throned and set high?—servants, who seem no less, Which are to France the spies and speculations Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen, Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes, Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne Against the old kind king, or something deeper, Whereof perchance these are but furnishings— But true it is. From France there comes a power Into this scattered kingdom, who already, Wise in our negligence, have secret feet In some of our best ports and are at point To show their open banner. Now to you. If on my credit you dare build so far To make your speed to Dover, you shall find Some that will thank you, making just report Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow The king hath cause to plain. I am a gentleman of blood and breeding, And from some knowledge and assurance offer This office to you.
I will talk further with you.
[giving GENTLEMAN a purse and a ring] No, do not. For confirmation that I am much more Than my outwall, open this purse and take What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia— As fear not but you shall—show her this ring. And she will tell you who that fellow is That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm! I will go seek the king.
Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Few words, but to effect more than all yet: That when we have found the king— in which your pain That way; I’ll this—he that first lights on him Holla the other.
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow! You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the cocks! You sulfurous and thought-executing fires, Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts, Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder, Smite flat the thick rotundity o' th' world, Crack nature’s molds, all germens spill at once That make ingrateful man!
O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rainwater out o' door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters blessing. Here’s a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! Spout, rain! Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters. I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness. I never gave you kingdom, called you children. You owe me no subscription. Why then, let fall Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand, your slave— A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man. But yet I call you servile ministers, That will with two pernicious daughters joined Your high engendered battles 'gainst a head So old and white as this. Oh, ho! 'Tis foul.
He that has a house to put ’s head in has a good headpiece. The codpiece that will house Before the head has any— The head and he shall louse. So beggars marry many. The man that makes his toe What he his heart should make Shall of a corn cry woe, And turn his sleep to wake. For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I will be the pattern of all patience.I will say nothing.
Who’s there?
Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece—that’s a wise man and a fool.
[to LEAR] Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies Gallow the very wanderers of the dark And make them keep their caves. Since I was man, Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder, Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry Th' affliction nor the fear.
Let the great gods That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch That hast within thee undivulgèd crimes Unwhipped of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand, Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue That art incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake, That under covert and convenient seeming Hast practiced on man’s life. Close pent-up guilts, Rive your concealing continents and cry These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man More sinned against than sinning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack, bareheaded? Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel. Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest. Repose you there, while I to this hard house— More harder than the stones whereof ’tis raised, Which even but now, demanding after you, Denied me to come in—return, and force Their scanted courtesy.
My wits begin to turn.— [to FOOL] Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?Iam cold myself. [to KENT] Where is this straw, my fellow? The art of our necessities is strange That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel. Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart That’s sorry yet for thee.
[sings] He that has and a little tiny wit— With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain— Must make content with his fortunes fit, For the rain it raineth every day.
True, my good boy.—Come, bring us to this hovel.
This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I’ll speak a prophecy ere I go. When priests are more in word than matter, When brewers mar their malt with water, When nobles are their tailors' tutors, No heretics burned but wenches' suitors, When every case in law is right, No squire in debt nor no poor knight, When slanders do not live in tongues, Nor cutpurses come not to throngs, When usurers tell their gold i' th' field, And bawds and whores do churches build— Then shall the realm of Albion Come to great confusion. Then comes the time, who lives to see ’t, That going shall be used with feet. This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing. When I desire their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain of their perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural!
Go to, say you nothing. There’s a division betwixt the dukes. And a worse matter than that: I have received a letter this night. 'Tis dangerous to be spoken. I have locked the letter in my closet. These injuries the king now bears will be revenged home. There’s part of a poweralready footed. We must incline to the king. I will look him and privily relieve him. Go you and maintain talk with the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I die for it—as no less is threatened me—the kingmy old master must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund. Pray you, be careful.
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke Instantly know, and of that letter too. This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me That which my father loses—no less than all. The younger rises when the old doth fall.
Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.The tyranny of the open night’s too roughFor nature to endure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me alone.
Good my lord, enter here.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
Thou think’st ’tis much that this contentious storm Invades us to the skin. So ’tis to thee. But where the greater malady is fixed The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear, But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea Thou’dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the mind’s free, The body’s delicate. The tempest in my mind Doth from my senses take all feeling else Save what beats there—filial ingratitude. Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand For lifting food to ’t? But I will punish home. No, I will weep no more. In such a night To shut me out! Pour on, I will endure. In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril, Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all— Oh, that way madness lies. Let me shun that. No more of that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my lord, enter here.
Prithee, go in thyself. Seek thine own ease. This tempest will not give me leave to ponder On things would hurt me more. But I’ll go in. [to FOOL] In, boy. Go first. You houseless poverty— Nay, get thee in. I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep.
Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are, That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm, How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides, Your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you From seasons such as these? Oh, I have ta'en Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp. Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel, That thou mayst shake the superflux to them And show the heavens more just.
[within] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!
Come not in here, nuncle. Here’s a spirit. Help me, help me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me thy hand. Who’s there?
A spirit, a spirit. He says his name’s Poor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw? Come forth.
Away! The foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. Hum! Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.
Didst thou give all to thy two daughters, and art thoucome to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who gives any thing to Poor Tom, whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlipool, o'er bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges tocourse his own shadow for a traitor? Bless thy five wits. Tom’s a-cold. Oh, do-de, do-de, do-de. Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do Poor Tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now—and there—and there again—and there.
What, has his daughters brought him to this pass?—Couldst thou save nothing? Wouldst thou give 'em all?
Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air Hang fated o'er men’s faults light on thy daughters!
He hath no daughters, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Death, traitor! Nothing could have subdued nature To such a lowness but his unkind daughters. Is it the fashion that discarded fathers Should have thus little mercy on their flesh? Judicious punishment! 'Twas this flesh begot Those pelican daughters.
Pillicock sat on Pillicock hill. Alow, alow, loo, loo!
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
Take heed o' th' foul fiend. Obey thy parents, keep thyword’s justice, swear not, commit not with man’s sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud array. Tom’s a-cold.
What hast thou been?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress' heart and did the act of darkness with her, swore as many oaths as I spake words and broke them in the sweet face of heaven—one that slept in the contriving of lust and waked to do it. Wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in woman outparamoured the Turk. False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand—hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. Let not the creaking of shoes northe rustling of silks betray thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets,thy pen from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, says, “Suum, mun, nonny.” Dauphin my boy, my boy, cessez. Let him trot by.
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.—Is man no more than this? Consider him well.— Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! Here’s three on ’s are sophisticated. Thou art the thing itself. Unaccommodatedman is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art.—Off, off, you lendings! Come. Unbutton here. [tears at his clothes]
Prithee, nuncle, be contented. 'Tis a naughty night to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher’s heart—a small spark, all the rest on ’s body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin, squints the eye and makes the harelip, mildews the white wheat and hurts the poor creature of earth. St. Withold footed thrice the 'old. He met the nightmare and her ninefold, Bid her alight, And her troth plight. And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!
How fares your grace?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][indicating GLOUCESTER] What’s he?
Who’s there? What is ’t you seek?
What are you there? Your names?
Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tadpole, the wall newt, and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow dung for salads, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to tithing and stocked, punished and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body, Horse to ride and weapon to wear. But mice and rats and such small deer Have been Tom’s food for seven long year. Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin. Peace, thou fiend!
[to LEAR] What, hath your grace no better company?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Prince of Darkness is a gentleman. Modo he’s called, and Mahu.
[To LEAR] Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vileThat it doth hate what gets it.
Poor Tom’s a-cold.
Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer To obey in all your daughters' hard commands. Though their injunction be to bar my doors And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you, Yet have I ventured to come seek you out And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.— [to EDGAR] What is the cause of thunder?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LEAR] Good my lord, take his offer. Go into the house.
I’ll talk a word with this same learnèd Theban.—What is your study?
How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
[aside to GLOUCESTER] Importune him once more to go, mylord.His wits begin t' unsettle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Canst thou blame him?
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent— He said it would be thus, poor banished man. Thou say’st the king grows mad. I’ll tell thee, friend, I am almost mad myself. I had a son, Now outlawed from my blood. He sought my life, But lately, very late. I loved him, friend— No father his son dearer. Truth to tell thee, The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this! [to LEAR] I do beseech your grace—
O, cry your mercy, sir.— [to EDGAR] Noble philosopher, your company.
Tom’s a-cold.
In, fellow. There, into th' hovel. Keep thee warm.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come let’s in all.
This way, my lord.
[indicating EDGAR] With him!I will keep still with my philosopher.
[to GLOUCESTER] Good my lord, soothe him. Let him takethe fellow.
Take him you on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to EDGAR ] Sirrah, come on. Go along with us.
Come, good Athenian.
No words, no words. Hush.
Child Roland to the dark tower came,His word was still “Fie, foh, and fum,I smell the blood of a British man.”
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus givesway to loyalty, something fears me to think of.
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother’s evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable badness in himself.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just! [giving CORNWALL a letter] This is the letter which he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens, that this treason were not, or not I the detector!
Go with me to the duchess.
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mightybusiness in hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.
[aside] If I find him comforting the king, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. [to CORNWALL] I will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love.
Here is better than the open air. Take it thankfully. Iwill piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be long from you.
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.The gods reward your kindness!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Frateretto calls me and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman?
A king, a king!
No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son, for he’s a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
To have a thousand with red burning spitsCome hissing in upon 'em!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The foul fiend bites my back.
He’s mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse’s health, a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath.
It shall be done. I will arraign them straight. [to EDGAR] Come, sit thou here, most learnèd justicer. [to FOOL] Thou, sapient sir, sit here.—Now, you she-foxes—
Look, where he stands and glares!—Want’st thou eyes at trial, madam? [sings] Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me—
[sings] Her boat hath a leak, And she must not speak Why she dares not come over to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The foul fiend haunts Poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale. Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly for two white herring. Croak not, black angel. I have no food for thee.
[to LEAR] How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed.Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
I’ll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence. [to EDGAR] Thou robèd man of justice, take thy place. [to FOOL] And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity, Bench by his side. [to KENT ] You are o' th' commission. Sit you too.
Let us deal justly. [ sings] Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd? Thy sheep be in the corn. And for one blast of thy minikin mouth, Thy sheep shall take no harm. Purr! The cat is gray.
Arraign her first. 'Tis Goneril. I here take my oath before this honorable assembly, she kicked the poor kingher father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
She cannot deny it.
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
And here’s another, whose warped looks proclaim What store her heart is made on. Stop her there! Arms, arms, sword, fire, corruption in the place! False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape?
Bless thy five wits.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LEAR] O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,That thou so oft have boasted to retain?
[aside] My tears begin to take his part so much,They’ll mar my counterfeiting.
The little dogs and all,Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart—see, they bark at me.
Tom will throw his head at them.—Avaunt, you curs! Be thy mouth or black or white, Tooth that poisons if it bite, Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim, Hound or spaniel, brach or him, Bobtail tyke or trundle-tail— Tom will make them weep and wail. For with throwing thus my head, Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled. Do-de, de-de. Cessez! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.
Then let them anatomize Regan. See what breeds about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes thesehard hearts? [to EDGAR] You, sir, I entertain you for one of my hundred. Only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You will say they are Persian attire, butlet them be changed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Make no noise, make no noise. Draw the curtains—so, so,so. We’ll go to supper i' th' morning. So, so, so. [sleeps]
And I’ll go to bed at noon.
[to KENT] Come hither, friend. Where is the king my master?
Here, sir, but trouble him not. His wits are gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms. I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him. There is a litter ready. Lay him in ’t And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master. If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life, With thine and all that offer to defend him, Stand in assurèd loss. Take up, take up, And follow me, that will to some provision Give thee quick conduct.
Oppressèd nature sleeps.— This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews, Which, if convenience will not allow, Stand in hard cure. [to FOOL] Come, help to bear thy master. Thou must not stay behind.
Come, come, away.
When we our betters see bearing our woes, We scarcely think our miseries our foes. Who alone suffers, suffers most i' th' mind, Leaving free things and happy shows behind. But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip When grief hath mates and bearing fellowship. How light and portable my pain seems now When that which makes me bend makes the king bow. He childed as I fathered. Tom, away! Mark the high noises and thyself bewray When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee, In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee. What will hap more tonight, safe ’scape the king! Lurk, lurk.
[to GONERIL] Post speedily to my lord your husband. Show him this letter. The army of France is landed. —Seek out the traitor Gloucester.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my displeasure.— Edmund, keep you our sister company. The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the duke where you are going, to a most festinate preparation. We are bound to the like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.— Farewell, dear sister. [to EDMUND] Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.
How now? Where’s the king?
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence. Some five or six and thirty of his knights, Hot questrists after him, met him at gate, Who with some other of the lord’s dependants Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast To have well-armèd friends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
Edmund, farewell.
Go seek the traitor Gloucester.Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life Without the form of justice, yet our power Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men May blame, but not control.—Who’s there? The traitor?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ingrateful fox, ’tis he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What mean your graces? Good my friends, considerYou are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.
Bind him, I say.
Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find—
By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly doneTo pluck me by the beard.
So white, and such a traitor?
Naughty lady, These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host. With robbers' hands my hospitable favors You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
Be simple-answered, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors Late footed in the kingdom?
To whose handsYou have sent the lunatic king. Speak.
I have a letter guessingly set down,Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,And not from one opposed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent the king?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore to Dover?—Let him first answer that.
I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
Wherefore to Dover, sir?
Because I would not see thy cruèl nails Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs. The sea, with such a storm as his bare head In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up, And quenched the stellèd fires. Yet poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain. If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time, Thou shouldst have said, “Good porter, turn the key,” All cruèls else subscribed. But I shall see The wingèd vengeance overtake such children.
“See” ’t shalt thou never.—Fellows, hold the chair.—Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He that will think to live till he be old,Give me some help!
O cruel! O you gods!
One side will mock another—th' other too.
If you see vengeance—
Hold your hand, my lord! I have served you ever since I was a child. But better service have I never done you Than now to bid you hold.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, you dog?
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,I’d shake it on this quarrel.
What do you mean?
My villain!
Nay then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to another servant] Give me thy sword.—A peasant stand up thus? [takes a sword, runs at FIRST SERVANT behind, and killshim]
Oh, I am slain!—My lord, you have one eye left To see some mischief on him. Oh! [dies]
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly! [plucks out GLOUCESTER’s other eye] Where is thy luster now?
All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Edmund?Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of natureTo quit this horrid act.
Out, treacherous villain! Thou call’st on him that hates thee. It was he That made the overture of thy treasons to us, Who is too good to pity thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my follies! Then Edgar was abused. Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smellHis way to Dover.
[to CORNWALL] How is ’t, my lord? How look you?
I have received a hurt. Follow me, lady.— Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave Upon the dunghill.— Regan, I bleed apace. Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
I’ll never care what wickedness I do,If this man come to good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If she live long, And in the end meet the old course of death,Women will all turn monsters.
Let’s follow the old earl, and get the BedlamTo lead him where he would. His roguish madnessAllows itself to any thing.
Go thou. I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggsTo apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned, Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst, The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear. The lamentable change is from the best; The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then, Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace! The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst Owes nothing to thy blasts.
But who comes here? My father, poorly led? World, world, O world! But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, Life would not yield to age.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to GLOUCESTER] O my good lord,I have been your tenant and your father’s tenant these fourscore years.
Away, get thee away. Good friend, be gone.Thy comforts can do me no good at all.Thee they may hurt.
Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes. I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen, Our means secure us and our mere defects Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar, The food of thy abusèd father’s wrath, Might I but live to see thee in my touch, I’d say I had eyes again!
How now? Who’s there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] O gods! Who is ’t can say “I am at the worst?”I am worse than e'er I was.
[to GLOUCESTER] 'Tis poor mad Tom.
[aside] And worse I may be yet. The worst is notSo long as we can say “This is the worst.”
[to EDGAR] Fellow, where goest?
Is it a beggarman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madman and beggar too.
He has some reason, else he could not beg. I' th' last night’s storm I such a fellow saw, Which made me think a man a worm. My son Came then into my mind, and yet my mind Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since. As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods. They kill us for their sport.
[aside] How should this be?Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow, Angering itself and others.—Bless thee, master!
Is that the naked fellow?
Ay, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then prithee, get thee gone. If for my sake Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love. And bring some covering for this naked soul, Which I’ll entreat to lead me.
Alack, sir, he is mad.
'Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.Do as I bid thee. Or rather, do thy pleasure.Above the rest, be gone.
I’ll bring him the best 'parel that I have,Come on ’t what will.
Sirrah, naked fellow—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Poor Tom’s a-cold. [aside] I cannot daub it further.
Come hither, fellow.
[aside] And yet I must.—Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Know’st thou the way to Dover?
Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, goodman’s son, from the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once: of lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and mowing,who since possesses chambermaids and waiting-women. So bless thee, master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Giving EDGAR a purse] Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still. Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man, That slaves your ordinance, that will not see Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly. So distribution should undo excess, And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
Ay, master.
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head Looks fearfully in the confinèd deep. Bring me but to the very brim of it, And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear With something rich about me. From that place I shall no leading need.
Give me thy arm.Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husbandNot met us on the way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, where’s your master?
Madam, within—but never man so changed. I told him of the army that was landed. He smiled at it. I told him you were coming. His answer was “The worse.” Of Gloucester’s treachery And of the loyal service of his son, When I informed him, then he called me “sot,” And told me I had turned the wrong side out. What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him; What like, offensive.
[to EDMUND ] Then shall you go no further. It is the cowish terror of his spirit That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother. Hasten his musters and conduct his powers. I must change names at home, and give the distaff Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear— If you dare venture in your own behalf— A mistress’s command. Wear this. Spare speech. Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak, Would stretch thy spirits up into the air. [kisses EDMUND] Conceive, and fare thee well.
Yours in the ranks of death.
My most dear Gloucester!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, the difference of man and man!To thee a woman’s services are due.My fool usurps my body.
Madam, here comes my lord.
I have been worth the whistle.
O Goneril, You are not worth the dust which the rude wind Blows in your face. I fear your disposition. That nature, which contemns its origin Cannot be bordered certain in itself. She that herself will sliver and disbranch From her material sap perforce must wither And come to deadly use.
No more. The text is foolish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile. Filths savor but themselves. What have you done? Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed? A father, and a gracious agèd man, Whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would lick, Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded. Could my good brother suffer you to do it— A man, a prince by him so benefited? If that the heavens do not their visible spirits Send quickly down to tame these vile offenses, It will come: Humanity must perforce prey on itself Like monsters of the deep.
Milk-livered man That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs— Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning Thine honor from thy suffering; that not know’st Fools do those villains pity who are punished Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy drum? France spreads his banners in our noiseless land, With plumèd helm thy state begins to threat, Whiles thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries, “Alack, why does he so?”
See thyself, devil!Proper deformity shows not in the fiendSo horrid as in woman.
O vain fool!
Thou changèd and self-covered thing, for shame! Bemonster not thy feature. Were ’t my fitness To let these hands obey my blood, They are apt enough to dislocate and tear Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend, A woman’s shape doth shield thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, your manhood, mew!
What news?
O my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead,Slain by his servant, going to put outThe other eye of Gloucester.
Gloucester’s eyes?
A servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse, Opposed against the act, bending his sword To his great master; who thereat enraged Flew on him and amongst them felled him dead— But not without that harmful stroke, which since Hath plucked him after.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This shows you are above, You justicers, that these our nether crimes So speedily can venge! But oh, poor Gloucester— Lost he his other eye?
Both, both, my lord.—This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.'Tis from your sister.
[aside] One way I like this well. But being widow, and my Gloucester with her, May all the building in my fancy pluck Upon my hateful life. Another way The news is not so tart.— I’ll read and answer.
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is not here.
No, my good lord. I met him back again.
Knows he the wickedness?
Ay, my good lord. 'Twas he informed against him, And quit the house on purpose that their punishmentMight have the freer course.
Gloucester, I live To thank thee for the love thou showed’st the king, And to revenge thine eyes.— Come hither, friend. Tell me what more thou know’st.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the reason?
Something he left imperfect in the state which, since his coming forth, is thought of; which imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal returnwas most required and necessary.
Who hath he left behind him general?
The Marshal of France, Monsieur la Far.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence, And now and then an ample tear trilled down Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen Over her passion, who, most rebel-like, Sought to be king o'er her.
O, then it moved her?
Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove Who should express her goodliest. You have seen Sunshine and rain at once—her smiles and tears Were like a better way. Those happy smilets That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence As pearls from diamonds dropped. In brief, Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved If all could so become it.
Made she no verbal question?
Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of “father” Pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart, Cried, “Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies, sisters! Kent, father, sisters! What, i' th' storm, i' th' night? Let pity not be believed.” There she shook The holy water from her heavenly eyes, And clamor moistened. Then away she started To deal with grief alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is the stars, The stars above us, govern our conditions. Else one self mate and mate could not beget Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
No.
Was this before the king returned?
No, since.
Well, sir, the poor distressèd Lear’s i' th' town, Who sometime in his better tune remembers What we are come about, and by no means Will yield to see his daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, good sir?
A sovereign shame so elbows him. His own unkindness That stripped her from his benediction turned her To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights To his dog-hearted daughters. These things sting His mind so venomously that burning shame Detains him from Cordelia.
Alack, poor gentleman!
Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?
'Tis so. They are afoot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause Will in concealment wrap me up awhile. When I am known aright you shall not grieve Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go Along with me.
Alack, ’tis he. Why, he was met even now As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud, Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, With burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers, Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow In our sustaining corn.— A century send forth. Search every acre in the high-grown field, And bring him to our eye.
What can man’s wisdom In the restoring his bereavèd sense?He that helps him take all my outward worth.
There is means, madam. Our foster nurse of nature is repose, The which he lacks— that to provoke in him Are many simples operative, whose power Will close the eye of anguish.
All blessed secrets, All you unpublished virtues of the earth, Spring with my tears. Be aidant and remediate In the good man’s distress. Seek, seek for him, Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life That wants the means to lead it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]News, madam.The British powers are marching hitherward.
'Tis known before. Our preparation stands In expectation of them. O dear father, It is thy business that I go about. Therefore great France My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied. No blown ambition doth our arms incite, But love—dear love!—and our aged father’s right. Soon may I hear and see him.
But are my brother’s powers set forth?
Ay, madam.
Himself in person there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, with much ado.Your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
No, madam.
What might import my sister’s letter to him?
I know not, lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter. It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out, To let him live. Where he arrives he moves All hearts against us. Edmund I think is gone In pity of his misery to dispatch His nighted life; moreover to descry The strength o' th' enemy.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
Our troops set forth tomorrow. Stay with us.The ways are dangerous.
I may not, madam.My lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you Transport her purposes by word? Belike Some things—I know not what. I’ll love thee much. Let me unseal the letter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I had rather—
I know your lady does not love her husband. I am sure of that. And at her late being here She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
I, madam?
I speak in understanding. Y' are. I know ’t. Therefore I do advise you, take this note. My lord is dead. Edmund and I have talked, And more convenient is he for my hand Than for your lady’s. You may gather more. If you do find him, pray you give him this. And when your mistress hears thus much from you, I pray desire her call her wisdom to her. So fare you well. If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Would I could meet him, madam, I should showWhat party I do follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fare thee well.
When shall we come to th' top of that same hill?
You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.
Methinks the ground is even.
Horrible steep.Hark, do you hear the sea?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, truly.
Why then, your other senses grow imperfectBy your eyes' anguish.
So may it be indeed.Methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak’stIn better phrase and matter than thou didst.
You’re much deceived. In nothing am I changedBut in my garments.
Methinks you’re better spoken.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come on, sir. Here’s the place. Stand still. How fearful And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low! The crows and choughs that wing the midway air Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down Hangs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade! Methinks he seems no bigger than his head. The fishermen that walk upon the beach Appear like mice. And yon tall anchoring bark, Diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge That on th' unnumbered idle pebbles chafes Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight Topple down headlong.
Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand. You are now within a footOf th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moonWould I not leap upright.
Let go my hand. [gives EDGAR another purse] Here, friend, ’s another purse, in it a jewel Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off. Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now fare you well, good sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart.
[aside] Why I do trifle thus with his despairIs done to cure it.
O you mighty gods, [kneels] This world I do renounce, and in your sights Shake patiently my great affliction off. If I could bear it longer and not fall To quarrel with your great opposeless wills, My snuff and loathèd part of nature should Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!— Now, fellow, fare thee well. (falls)
Gone, sir. Farewell. [aside] And yet I know not how conceit may rob The treasury of life when life itself Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought, By this had thought been past. Alive or dead?— Ho you, sir, friend! Hear you, sir? Speak.— Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.— What are you, sir?
Away, and let me die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air, So many fathom down precipitating, Thou’dst shivered like an egg. But thou dost breathe, Hast heavy substance, bleed’st not, speak’st, art sound. Ten masts at each make not the altitude Which thou hast perpendicularly fell. Thy life’s a miracle. Speak yet again.
But have I fall'n, or no?
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.Look up a-height. The shrill-gorged lark so farCannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
Alack, I have no eyes. Is wretchedness deprived that benefit, To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage And frustrate his proud will.
Give me your arm. Up—so. How is ’t? Feel you your legs? You stand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Too well, too well.
This is above all strangeness.Upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was thatWhich parted from you?
A poor unfortunate beggar.
As I stood here below, methought his eyes Were two full moons. He had a thousand noses, Horns whelked and waved like the enragèd sea. It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father, Think that the clearest gods, who make them honors Of men’s impossibilities, have preserved thee.
I do remember now. Henceforth I’ll bear Affliction till it do cry out itself, “Enough, enough,” and die. That thing you speak of, I took it for a man. Often ’twould say, “The fiend, the fiend!” He led me to that place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bear free and patient thoughts.
But who comes here?The safer sense will ne'er accommodateHis master thus.
No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the king himself.
[aside] O thou side-piercing sight!
Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a crowkeeper. Draw me a clothier’s yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted cheese will do ’t. There’s my gauntlet. I’ll prove it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird. I' th' clout, i' th' clout. Hewgh! Give the word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet marjoram.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ha! Goneril with a white beard? Ha, Regan? They flattered me like a dog and told me I had white hairs inmy beard ere the black ones were there. To say “Ay” and“No” to everything that I said “Ay” and “No” to was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding—there I found 'em, there I smelt 'emout. Go to, they are not men o' their words. They told me I was everything. 'Tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.
The trick of that voice I do well remember.Is ’t not the king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, every inch a king! When I do stare, see how the subject quakes. I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause? Adultery? Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No. The wren goes to ’t, and the small gilded fly Does lecher in my sight. Let copulation thrive, for Gloucester’s bastard son Was kinder to his father than my daughters Got ’tween the lawful sheets. To ’t, luxury, pell-mell! For I lack soldiers. Behold yond simpering dame, Whose face between her forks presages snow; That minces virtue and does shake the head To hear of pleasure’s name. The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to ’t With a more riotous appetite. Down from the waist they are centaurs, Though women all above. But to the girdle do the gods inherit. Beneath is all the fiends'; there’s hell, there’s darkness, There’s the sulphurous pit— burning, scalding, Stench, consumption! Fie, fie, fie, pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, To sweeten my imagination. There’s money for thee.
O, let me kiss that hand!
Let me wipe it first. It smells of mortality.
O ruined piece of nature! This great worldShall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid. I’ll not love. Read thou this challenge. Mark but the penning of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Were all thy letters suns, I could not see one.
[aside] I would not take this from report. It is,And my heart breaks at it.
Read.
What, with the case of eyes?
Oh ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, norno money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light. Yet you see how this world goes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I see it feelingly.
What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes with no eyes. Look with thine ears. See how yon justice railsupon yon simple thief. Hark in thine ear: change placesand, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer’s dog bark at a beggar?
Ay, sir.
And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog’s obeyed in office. Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand. Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back. Thou hotly lust’st to use her in that kind For which thou whipp’st her. The usurer hangs the cozener. Through tattered clothes great vices do appear; Robes and furred gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold, And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks. Arm it in rags, a pigmy’s straw does pierce it. None does offend—none, I say, none. I’ll able 'em. Take that of me, my friend, who have the power To seal th' accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes, And like a scurvy politician seem To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now, Pull off my boots. Harder, harder. So.
[aside] O matter and impertinency mixed! Reason in madness!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes. I know thee well enough. Thy name is Gloucester. Thou must be patient. We came crying hither. Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark me.
Alack, alack the day!
When we are born, we cry that we are come To this great stage of fools. This a good block. It were a delicate stratagem to shoe A troop of horse with felt. I’ll put ’t in proof. And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law, Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
Oh, here he is. Lay hand upon him.—Sir,Your most dear daughter—
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even The natural fool of fortune. Use me well. You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons. I am cut to th' brains.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You shall have anything.
No seconds? All myself? Why, this would make a man a man of salt, To use his eyes for garden water-pots, Ay, and laying autumn’s dust.
Good sir—
I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom.What, I will be jovial. Come, come.I am a king, my masters, know you that?
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then there’s life in ’t. Come, an if you get it, you shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, Past speaking of in a king. Thou hast a daughter Who redeems nature from the general curse Which twain have brought her to.
Hail, gentle sir.
Sir, speed you. What’s your will?
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most sure and vulgar. Everyone hears thatThat can distinguish sound.
But, by your favor,How near’s the other army?
Near and on speedy foot. The main descryStands in the hourly thought.
I thank you, sir. That’s all.
Though that the queen on special cause is here,Her army is moved on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you, sir.
You ever gentle gods, take my breath from me.Let not my worser spirit tempt me againTo die before you please.
Well pray you, father.
Now, good sir, what are you?
A most poor man made tame to fortune’s blows, Who by the art of known and feeling sorrows Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand, I’ll lead you to some biding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hearty thanks. The bounty and the benison of heavenTo boot and boot.
A proclaimed prize! Most happy! That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor, Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out That must destroy thee.
Now let thy friendly handPut strength enough to ’t.
Wherefore, bold peasant, Darest thou support a published traitor? Hence, Lest that th' infection of his fortune take Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
'Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let go, slave, or thou diest!
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk pass. An 'chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life, ’twould not ha' bin zo long as ’tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th' old man. Keep out, che vor' ye, or I’se try whether your costard or my ballow be the harder. 'Chill be plain with you.
Out, dunghill!
'Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come, no matter vor your foins.
[falling] Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse. If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body. And give the letters which thou find’st about me To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out Upon the British party. O untimely death! [ dies]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know thee well—a serviceable villain,As duteous to the vices of thy mistressAs badness would desire.
What, is he dead?
Sit you down, father. Rest you. Let’s see these pockets. The letters that he speaks of May be my friends. He’s dead. I am only sorry He had no other death’s-man. Let us see. [takes letters out of OSWALD’s pocket and opens them] Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not. To know our enemies' minds, we rip their hearts. Their papers is more lawful. [reads] “Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have many opportunities to cut him off. If your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is nothing done if he return the conqueror. Then am I the prisoner and his bed my gaol, from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your labor. Your—wife, so I would say—affectionate servant, Goneril.” O indistinguished space of woman’s will! A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life, And the exchange my brother!— Here in the sands Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified Of murderous lechers. And in the mature time With this ungracious paper strike the sight Of the death-practiced duke. For him ’tis well That of thy death and business I can tell.
The king is mad. How stiff is my vile sense, That I stand up and have ingenious feeling Of my huge sorrows. Better I were distract— So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs, And woes by wrong imaginations lose The knowledge of themselves.
Give me your hand. Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O thou good Kent, how shall I live and workTo match thy goodness? My life will be too short,And every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid. All my reports go with the modest truth,Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
Be better suited.These weeds are memories of those worser hours.I prithee, put them off.
Pardon, dear madam. Yet to be known shortens my made intent. My boon I make it that you know me not Till time and I think meet.
Then be ’t so, my good lord.—How does the king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, sleeps still.
O you kind gods, Cure this great breach in his abusèd nature, Th' untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up, Of this child-changèd father!
So please your majestyThat we may wake the king? He hath slept long.
Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed I' th' sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of his sleepWe put fresh garments on him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.I doubt not of his temperance.
Very well.
Please you, draw near.—Louder the music there!
[kisses LEAR] O my dear father, restoration hang Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss Repair those violent harms that my two sisters Have in thy reverence made!
Kind and dear princess!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had you not been their father, these white flakes Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face To be opposed against the warring winds? To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder In the most terrible and nimble stroke Of quick cross lightning? To watch—poor perdu!— With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s meanest dog, Though he had bit me, should have stood that night Against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor father, To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn In short and musty straw? Alack, alack! 'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once Had not concluded all.—He wakes. Speak to him.
Madam, do you. 'Tis fittest.
How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?
You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave. Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears Do scald like molten lead.
Sir, do you know me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are a spirit, I know. Where did you die?
[aside to DOCTOR] Still, still far wide!
He’s scarce awake. Let him alone awhile.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight? I am mightily abused. I should ev'n die with pity To see another thus. I know not what to say. I will not swear these are my hands. Let’s see. I feel this pinprick. Would I were assured Of my condition.
[kneels] O, look upon me, sir,And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.No, sir, you must not kneel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray, do not mock me. I am a very foolish fond old man, Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less. And to deal plainly I fear I am not in my perfect mind. Methinks I should know you, and know this man. Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant What place this is, and all the skill I have Remembers not these garments. Nor I know not Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me, For as I am a man, I think this lady To be my child Cordelia.
And so I am, I am.
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray, weep not. If you have poison for me, I will drink it. I know you do not love me, for your sisters Have, as I do remember, done me wrong. You have some cause; they have not.
No cause, no cause.
Am I in France?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In your own kingdom, sir.
Do not abuse me.
Be comforted, good madam. The great rage, You see, is killed in him. And yet it is danger To make him even o'er the time he has lost. Desire him to go in. Trouble him no more Till further settling.
Will ’t please your highness walk?
You must bear with me. Pray you now, forget and forgive.I am old and foolish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was soslain?
Most certain, sir.
Who is conductor of his people?
As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl of Kent in Germany.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Report is changeable. Tis time to look about. The powers of the kingdom approach apace.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you well, sir.
My point and period will be throughly wrought,Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.
[To a gentleman] Know of the duke if his last purpose hold, Or whether since he is advised by aught To change the course. He’s full of alteration And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis to be doubted, madam.
Now, sweet lord, You know the goodness I intend upon you. Tell me but truly— but then speak the truth— Do you not love my sister?
In honored love.
But have you never found my brother’s wayTo the forfended place?
That thought abuses you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am doubtful that you have been conjunctAnd bosomed with her as far as we call hers.
No, by mine honor, madam.
I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,Be not familiar with her.
Fear me not.She and the duke her husband!
[aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sisterShould loosen him and me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our very loving sister, well be-met. Sir, this I hear: the king is come to his daughter, With others whom the rigor of our state Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest I never yet was valiant. For this business, It touches us as France invades our land, Not bolds the king, with others whom I fear Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Sir, you speak nobly.
Why is this reasoned?
Combine together 'gainst the enemy, For these domestic and particular broilsAre not the question here.
Let’s then determine with the ancient of warOn our proceedings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall attend you presently at your tent.
Sister, you’ll go with us?
No.
'Tis most convenient. Pray you, go with us.
[aside] Oh ho, I know the riddle.—I will go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ALBANY] If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,Hear me one word.
[To EDMUND, REGAN, and GONERIL] I’ll overtake you.—
Speak.
[Giving ALBANY a letter] Before you fight the battle, ope this letter. If you have victory, let the trumpet sound For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem, I can produce a champion that will prove What is avouchèd there. If you miscarry, Your business of the world hath so an end, And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
Stay till I have read the letter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was forbid it.When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,And I’ll appear again.
Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
The enemy’s in view. Draw up your powers. [gives ALBANY a document] Here is the guess of their true strength and forces By diligent discovery, but your haste Is now urged on you.
We will greet the time.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love, Each jealous of the other as the stung Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take? Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed If both remain alive. To take the widow Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril, And hardly shall I carry out my side, Her husband being alive. Now, then, we’ll use His countenance for the battle, which being done, Let her who would be rid of him devise His speedy taking off. As for the mercy Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia, The battle done and they within our power, Shall never see his pardon, for my state Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, father, take the shadow of this tree For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive. If ever I return to you again, I’ll bring you comfort.
Grace go with you, sir.
Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away!King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.Give me thy hand. Come on.
No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure Their going hence even as their coming hither. Ripeness is all. Come on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And that’s true too.
Some officers take them away. Good guardUntil their greater pleasures first be knownThat are to censure them.
[to LEAR ] We are not the first Who with best meaning have incurred the worst. For thee, oppressèd King, I am cast down. Myself could else outfrown false fortune’s frown. Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no! Come, let’s away to prison. We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage. When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down And ask of thee forgiveness. So we’ll live, And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues Talk of court news, and we’ll talk with them too— Who loses and who wins, who’s in, who’s out— And take upon ’s the mystery of things As if we were God’s spies. And we’ll wear out In a walled prison packs and sects of great ones That ebb and flow by the moon.
Take them away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee? He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes. The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell, Ere they shall make us weep. We’ll see 'em starve first. Come.
Come hither, captain. Hark. [gives FIRST CAPTAIN a document] Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison. One step I have advanced thee. If thou dost As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men Are as the time is. To be tender-minded Does not become a sword. Thy great employment Will not bear question. Either say thou'lt do ’t, Or thrive by other means.
I’ll do ’t, my lord.
About it, and write “happy” when thou’st done.Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it soAs I have set it down.
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats. If it be man’s work, I’ll do ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to EDMUND] Sir, you have shown today your valiant strain, And fortune led you well. You have the captives That were the opposites of this day’s strife. I do require them of you, so to use them As we shall find their merits and our safety May equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit To send the old and miserable king To some retention and appointed guard— Whose age has charms in it, whose title more— To pluck the common bosom on his side, An turn our impressed lances in our eyes Which do command them. With him I sent the queen, My reason all the same, and they are ready Tomorrow or at further space t' appear Where you shall hold your session. At this time We sweat and bleed. The friend hath lost his friend, And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed By those that feel their sharpness. The question of Cordelia and her father Requires a fitter place.
Sir, by your patience,I hold you but a subject of this war,Not as a brother.
That’s as we list to grace him. Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers, Bore the commission of my place and person— The which immediacy may well stand up And call itself your brother.
Not so hot.In his own grace he doth exalt himselfMore than in your addition.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In my rights, By me invested, he compeers the best.
That were the most if he should husband you.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
Holla, holla!That eye that told you so looked but asquint.
Lady, I am not well, else I should answer From a full-flowing stomach. [to EDMUND ] General, Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony. Dispose of them, of me. The walls is thine. Witness the world that I create thee here My lord and master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mean you to enjoy him then?
The let-alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine, lord.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
[to EDMUND] Let the drum strike and prove my title thine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay yet. Hear reason.—Edmund, I arrest thee On capital treason, and in thine attaint This gilded serpent. [indicates GONERIL ] [to REGAN ] For your claim, fair sister, I bar it in the interest of my wife. 'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord. And I, her husband, contradict your banns. If you will marry, make your loves to me, My lady is bespoke.
An interlude!
Thou art armed, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound. If none appear to prove upon thy person Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons, There is my pledge. [throws down his glove] I’ll make it on thy heart, Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less Than I have here proclaimed thee.
Sick, oh, sick!
[aside] If not, I’ll ne'er trust medicine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][throwing down his glove] There’s my exchange. What in the world he is That names me traitor, villainlike he lies. Call by thy trumpet. He that dares approach, On him—on you, who not?—I will maintain My truth and honor firmly.
A herald, ho!
A herald, ho, a herald!
[to EDMUND] Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers, All levied in my name, have in my nameTook their discharge.
My sickness grows upon me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
Come hither, herald.—Let the trumpet sound,—And read out this. [gives the HERALD a document]
Sound, trumpet!
[reads] “If any man of quality or degree within the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the trumpet. He is bold in his defense.”
Again!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Again!
[to HERALD] Ask him his purposes, why he appearsUpon this call o' th' trumpet.
What are you?Your name, your quality, and why you answerThis present summons?
O, know, my name is lost. By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit. Yet am I noble as the adversary I come to cope withal.
Which is that adversary?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?
Himself. What sayst thou to him?
Draw thy sword, That if my speech offend a noble heart Thy arm may do thee justice. [draws his sword] Here is mine. Behold: it is the privilege of mine honors, My oath, and my profession. I protest— Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence, Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune, Thy valor and thy heart—thou art a traitor, False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father, Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince, And from th' extremest upward of thy head To the descent and dust below thy foot A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou “No,” This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak, Thou liest.
In wisdom I should ask thy name. But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike, And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes, What safe and nicely I might well delay By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn. Back do I toss these treasons to thy head, With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart— Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise, This sword of mine shall give them instant way, Where they shall rest for ever.—Trumpets, speak!
Save him, save him!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is practice, Gloucester. By th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished, But cozened and beguiled.
Shut your mouth, dame, Or with this paper shall I stop it.—Hold, sir, [gives the letter to EDMUND ] Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.— [to GONERIL] Nay, no tearing, lady. I perceive you knowit.
Say, if I do? The laws are mine, not thine.Who can arraign me for ’t?
Most monstrous, oh! [to EDMUND] Know’st thou this paper?
Ask me not what I know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go after her. She’s desperate. Govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done— And more, much more. The time will bring it out. 'Tis past, and so am I. [to EDGAR ] But what art thou That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble, I do forgive thee.
Let’s exchange charity. I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund. If more, the more thou’st wronged me. My name is Edgar, and thy father’s son. The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices Make instruments to plague us. The dark and vicious place where thee he got Cost him his eyes.
Thou’st spoken right. 'Tis true.The wheel is come full circle. I am here.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee. Let sorrow split my heart if ever I Did hate thee or thy father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Worthy prince, I know ’t.
Where have you hid yourself?How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale, And when ’tis told, oh, that my heart would burst! The bloody proclamation to escape, That followed me so near— O our lives' sweetness, That we the pain of death would hourly die Rather than die at once!— taught me to shift Into a madman’s rags, t' assume a semblance That very dogs disdained. And in this habit Met I my father with his bleeding rings, Their precious stones new lost, became his guide, Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair. Never—O fault!—revealed myself unto him Until some half-hour past, when I was armed. Not sure, though hoping of this good success, I asked his blessing, and from first to last Told him my pilgrimage. But his flawed heart— Alack, too weak the conflict to support— 'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief, Burst smilingly.
This speech of yours hath moved me,And shall perchance do good. But speak you on. You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in.For I am almost ready to dissolve,Hearing of this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This would have seemed a period To such as love not sorrow, but another To amplify too much would make much more And top extremity. Whilst I was big in clamor came there in a man Who, having seen me in my worst estate, Shunned my abhorred society, but then, finding Who ’twas that so endured, with his strong arms He fastened on my neck, and bellowed out As he’d burst heaven, threw him on my father, Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him That ever ear received— which in recounting His grief grew puissant and the strings of life Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded, And there I left him tranced.
But who was this?
Kent, sir, the banished Kent, who in disguiseFollowed his enemy king and did him service Improper for a slave.
Help, help, O, help!
What kind of help?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak, man.
What means that bloody knife?
'Tis hot, it smokes.It came even from the heart of—oh, she’s dead!
Who dead? Speak, man.
Your lady, sir, your lady. And her sisterBy her is poisoned. She confesses it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was contracted to them both. All threeNow marry in an instant.
Here comes Kent.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead. This judgment of the heavens that makes us trembleTouches us not with pity.
Oh, is this he?The time will not allow the complimentWhich very manners urges.
I am comeTo bid my king and master aye good night.Is he not here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Great thing of us forgot!—Speak, Edmund, where’s the king? And where’s Cordelia?—
Seest thou this object, Kent?
Alack, why thus?
Yet Edmund was beloved.The one the other poisoned for my sake, And after slew herself.
Even so.—Cover their faces.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pant for life. Some good I mean to do Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send— Be brief in it—to th' castle, for my writ Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia. Nay, send in time!
Run, run, O, run!
To who, my lord?—Who hath the office? SendThy token of reprieve.
Well thought on. Take my sword. The captain—Give it the captain.
Haste thee for thy life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hath commission from thy wife and me To hang Cordelia in the prison and To lay the blame upon her own despair, That she fordid herself.
The gods defend her!—bear him hence awhile.
Howl, howl, howl, howl! Oh, you are men of stones. Had I your tongues and eyes, I’d use them so That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone forever. I know when one is dead and when one lives. She’s dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass. If that her breath will mist or stain the stone, Why then, she lives.
Is this the promised end?
Or image of that horror?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fall and cease.
This feather stirs. She lives. If it be so, It is a chance which does redeem all sorrowsThat ever I have felt.
O my good master!
Prithee, away.
'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all! I might have saved her. Now she’s gone for ever.— Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha? What is ’t thou say’st?— Her voice was ever soft, Gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman.— I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.
'Tis true, my lords, he did.
Did I not, fellow? I have seen the day with my good biting falchion I would have made them skip. I am old now, And these same crosses spoil me. [to KENT ] Who are you? Mine eyes are not o' th' best, I’ll tell you straight.
If Fortune brag of two she loved and hated, One of them we behold.
This a dull sight.Are you not Kent?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The same. Your servant Kent.Where is your servant Caius?
He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that.He’ll strike, and quickly too. He’s dead and rotten.
No, my good lord. I am the very man—
I’ll see that straight.
That from your first of difference and decayHave followed your sad steps.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You’re welcome hither.
Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark, and deadly. Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,And desperately are dead.
Ay, so I think.
He knows not what he says, and vain it isThat we present us to him.
Very bootless.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Edmund is dead, my lord.
That’s but a trifle here.— You lords and noble friends, know our intent. What comfort to this great decay may come Shall be applied. For us, we will resign During the life of this old majesty To him our absolute power. [to EDGAR and KENT ] You, to your rights With boot, and such addition as your honors Have more than merited.— All friends shall taste The wages of their virtue, and all foes The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
And my poor fool is hanged.—No, no, no life? Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life, And thou no breath at all? Oh, thou'lt come no more, Never, never, never, never, never.— Pray you, undo this button. Thank you, sir. Do you see this? Look on her. Look, her lips. Look there, look there. O, O, O, O. [dies]
He faints!—My lord, my lord!
Break, heart. I prithee, break!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LEAR] Look up, my lord.
Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass. He hates himThat would upon the rack of this tough worldStretch him out longer.
Oh, he is gone indeed.
The wonder is he hath endured so long.He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence. Our present business Is to general woe. [to KENT and EDGAR] Friends of my soul, you twain Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.My master calls me. I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey. Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. The oldest hath borne most. We that are young Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives, Live register'd upon our brazen tombs And then grace us in the disgrace of death; When, spite of cormorant devouring Time, The endeavor of this present breath may buy That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge And make us heirs of all eternity. Therefore, brave conquerors,—for so you are, That war against your own affections And the huge army of the world's desires,— Our late edict shall strongly stand in force: Navarre shall be the wonder of the world; Our court shall be a little Academe, Still and contemplative in living art. You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville, Have sworn for three years' term to live with me My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes That are recorded in this schedule here: Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names, That his own hand may strike his honour down That violates the smallest branch herein: If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do, Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved; 'tis but a three years' fast: The mind shall banquet, though the body pine: Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumain is mortified: The grosser manner of these world's delights He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves: To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die; With all these living in philosophy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I can but say their protestation over; So much, dear liege, I have already sworn, That is, to live and study here three years. But there are other strict observances; As, not to see a woman in that term, Which I hope well is not enrolled there; And one day in a week to touch no food And but one meal on every day beside, The which I hope is not enrolled there; And then, to sleep but three hours in the night, And not be seen to wink of all the day— When I was wont to think no harm all night And make a dark night too of half the day— Which I hope well is not enrolled there: O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep, Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:I only swore to study with your graceAnd stay here in your court for three years' space.
You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.What is the end of study? let me know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, that to know, which else we should not know.
Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?
Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Come on, then; I will swear to study so, To know the thing I am forbid to know: As thus,—to study where I well may dine, When I to feast expressly am forbid; Or study where to meet some mistress fine, When mistresses from common sense are hid; Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath, Study to break it and not break my troth. If study's gain be thus and this be so, Study knows that which yet it doth not know: Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quiteAnd train our intellects to vain delight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain, Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain: As, painfully to pore upon a book To seek the light of truth; while truth the while Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look: Light seeking light doth light of light beguile: So, ere you find where light in darkness lies, Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes. Study me how to please the eye indeed By fixing it upon a fairer eye, Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed And give him light that it was blinded by. Study is like the heaven's glorious sun That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks: Small have continual plodders ever won Save base authority from others' books These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights That give a name to every fixed star Have no more profit of their shining nights Than those that walk and wot not what they are. Too much to know is to know nought but fame; And every godfather can give a name.
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How follows that?
Fit in his place and time.
In reason nothing.
Something then in rhyme.
Biron is like an envious sneaping frost,That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast Before the birds have any cause to sing? Why should I joy in any abortive birth? At Christmas I no more desire a rose Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled mirth; But like of each thing that in season grows. So you, to study now it is too late, Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out: go home, Biron: adieu.
No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you: And though I have for barbarism spoke more Than for that angel knowledge you can say, Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore And bide the penance of each three years' day. Give me the paper; let me read the same; And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
[Reads] 'Item, That no woman shall come within amile of my court:' Hath this been proclaimed?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Four days ago.
Let's see the penalty.
'On pain of losing her tongue.' Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I.
Sweet lord, and why?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
A dangerous law against gentility!
'Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise.' This article, my liege, yourself must break; For well you know here comes in embassy The French King's daughter with yourself to speak— A maid of grace and complete majesty— About surrender up of Aquitaine To her decrepit, sick and bedrid father: Therefore this article is made in vain, Or vainly comes the admired Princess hither.
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
So study evermore is overshot:While it doth study to have what it wouldIt doth forget to do the thing it should,And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,'Tis won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We must of force dispense with this decree;She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn Three thousand times within this three years' space; For every man with his affects is born, Not by might master'd but by special grace: If I break faith, this word shall speak for me; I am forsworn on 'mere necessity.' So to the laws at large I write my name:
And he that breaks them in the least degree Stands in attainder of eternal shame: Suggestions are to other as to me; But I believe, although I seem so loath, I am the last that will last keep his oath. But is there no quick recreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted With a refined traveller of Spain; A man in all the world's new fashion planted, That hath a mint of phrases in his brain; One whom the music of his own vain tongue Doth ravish like enchanting harmony; A man of complements, whom right and wrong Have chose as umpire of their mutiny: This child of fancy, that Armado hight, For interim to our studies shall relate In high-born words the worth of many a knight From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate. How you delight, my lords, I know not, I; But, I protest, I love to hear him lie And I will use him for my minstrelsy .
Armado is a most illustrious wight,A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;And so to study, three years is but short.
Which is the duke's own person?
This, fellow: what wouldst?
I myself reprehend his own person, for I am hisgrace's farborough: but I would see his own personin flesh and blood.
This is he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signior Arme—Arme—commends you. There's villanyabroad: this letter will tell you more.
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To hear? or forbear laughing?
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or toforbear both.
Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause toclimb in the merriness.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In what manner?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In manner and form following, sir; all those three: I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form, and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in manner and form following. Now, sir, for the manner,—it is the manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,— in some form.
For the following, sir?
As it shall follow in my correction: and God defendthe right!
Will you hear this letter with attention?
As we would hear an oracle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
[Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent andsole dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god,and body's fostering patron.'
Not a word of Costard yet.
[Reads] 'So it is,'—
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, intelling true, but so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace!
Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
No words!
Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
[Reads] 'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I did commend the black-oppressing humour to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to walk. The time when. About the sixth hour; when beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper: so much for the time when. Now for the ground which? which, I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park. Then for the place where; where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene and preposterous event, that draweth from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which here thou viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest; but to the place where; it standeth north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy curious- knotted garden: there did I see that low-spirited swain, that base minnow of thy mirth,'—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Me?
[Reads] 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'—
Me?
[Reads] 'that shallow vassal,'—
Still me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'—
O, me!
[Reads] 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thyestablished proclaimed edict and continent canon,which with,—O, with—but with this I passion to saywherewith,—
With a wench.
[Reads] 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy more sweet understanding, a woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of punishment, by thy sweet grace's officer, Anthony Dull; a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Me, an't shall please you; I am Anthony Dull.
[Reads] 'For Jaquenetta,—so is the weaker vessel called which I apprehended with the aforesaid swain, —I keep her as a vessel of the law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted and heart-burning heat of duty. ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
This is not so well as I looked for, but the bestthat ever I heard.
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what sayyou to this?
Sir, I confess the wench.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did you hear the proclamation?
I do confess much of the hearing it but little ofthe marking of it.
It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment, to be takenwith a wench.
I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.
Well, it was proclaimed 'damsel.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was no damsel, neither, sir; she was a virgin.
It is so varied, too; for it was proclaimed 'virgin.'
If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.
This maid will not serve your turn, sir.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fasta week with bran and water.
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.My Lord Biron, see him deliver'd o'er:And go we, lords, to put in practise thatWhich each to other hath so strongly sworn.
I'll lay my head to any good man's hat,These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.Sirrah, come on.
I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is, I was taken with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spiritgrows melancholy?
A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, mytender juvenal?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senor.
Why tough senor? why tough senor?
Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal?
I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epithetonappertaining to thy young days, which we maynominate tender.
And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to yourold time, which we may name tough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pretty and apt.
How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? orI apt, and my saying pretty?
Thou pretty, because little.
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, because quick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak you this in my praise, master?
In thy condign praise.
I will praise an eel with the same praise.
What, that an eel is ingenious?
That an eel is quick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.
I am answered, sir.
I love not to be crossed.
[Aside] He speaks the mere contrary; crosses love not him.
I have promised to study three years with the duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may do it in an hour, sir.
Impossible.
How many is one thrice told?
I am ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I confess both: they are both the varnish of acomplete man.
Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum ofdeuce-ace amounts to.
It doth amount to one more than two.
Which the base vulgar do call three.
True.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now heret is three studied, ere ye'll thrice wink: and how easy it is to put 'years' to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the dancing horse will tell you.
A most fine figure!
[Aside] To prove you a cipher.
I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devised curtsy. I think scorn to sigh: methinks I should outswear Cupid. Comfort, me, boy: what great men have been in love?
Hercules, master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, namemore; and, sweet my child, let them be men of goodrepute and carriage.
Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, greatcarriage, for he carried the town-gates on his backlike a porter: and he was in love.
O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth?
A woman, master.
Of what complexion?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
Tell me precisely of what complexion.
Of the sea-water green, sir.
Is that one of the four complexions?
As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Green indeed is the colour of lovers; but to have alove of that colour, methinks Samson had small reasonfor it. He surely affected her for her wit.
It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
My love is most immaculate white and red.
Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked undersuch colours.
Define, define, well-educated infant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My father's wit and my mother's tongue, assist me!
Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty andpathetical!
If she be made of white and red, Her faults will ne'er be known, For blushing cheeks by faults are bred And fears by pale white shown: Then if she fear, or be to blame, By this you shall not know, For still her cheeks possess the same Which native she doth owe. A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
The world was very guilty of such a ballad somethree ages since: but I think now 'tis not to befound; or, if it were, it would neither serve forthe writing nor the tune.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I mayexample my digression by some mighty precedent.Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in thepark with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.
[Aside] To be whipped; and yet a better love thanmy master.
Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
[Aside] And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
I say, sing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Forbear till this company be past.
Sir, the Duke's pleasure is, that you keep Costard safe: and you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but a' must fast three days a week. For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she is allowed for the day-woman. Fare you well.
I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
Man.
I will visit thee at the lodge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's hereby.
I know where it is situate.
Lord, how wise you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With that face?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I love thee.
So I heard you say.
And so, farewell.
Fair weather after you!
Come, Jaquenetta, away!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thoube pardoned.
Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on afull stomach.
Thou shalt be heavily punished.
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for theyare but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villain; shut him up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, you transgressing slave; away!
Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.
No, sir; that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolationthat I have seen, some shall see.
What shall some see?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.It is not for prisoners to be too silent in theirwords; and therefore I will say nothing: I thankGod I have as little patience as another man; andtherefore I can be quiet.
I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread. I shall be forsworn, which is a great argument of falsehood, if I love. And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted? Love is a familiar; Love is a devil: there is no evil angel but Love. Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent strength; yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit. Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club; and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier. The first and second cause will not serve my turn; the passado he respects not, the duello he regards not: his disgrace is to be called boy; but his glory is to subdue men. Adieu, valour! rust rapier! be still, drum! for your manager is in love; yea, he loveth. Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet. Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits: Consider who the king your father sends, To whom he sends, and what's his embassy: Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem, To parley with the sole inheritor Of all perfections that a man may owe, Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen. Be now as prodigal of all dear grace As Nature was in making graces dear When she did starve the general world beside And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean, Needs not the painted flourish of your praise: Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye, Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues: I am less proud to hear you tell my worth Than you much willing to be counted wise In spending your wit in the praise of mine. But now to task the tasker: good Boyet, You are not ignorant, all-telling fame Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow, Till painful study shall outwear three years, No woman may approach his silent court: Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course, Before we enter his forbidden gates, To know his pleasure; and in that behalf, Bold of your worthiness, we single you As our best-moving fair solicitor. Tell him, the daughter of the King of France, On serious business, craving quick dispatch, Importunes personal conference with his grace: Haste, signify so much; while we attend, Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,That are vow-fellows with this virtuous Duke?
Lord Longaville is one.
Know you the man?
I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast, Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized In Normandy, saw I this Longaville: A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd; Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms: Nothing becomes him ill that he would well. The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss, If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil, Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will; Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills It should none spare that come within his power.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
They say so most that most his humours know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.Who are the rest?
The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth, Of all that virtue love for virtue loved: Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill; For he hath wit to make an ill shape good, And shape to win grace though he had no wit. I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once; And much too little of that good I saw Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time Was there with him, if I have heard a truth. Biron they call him; but a merrier man, Within the limit of becoming mirth, I never spent an hour's talk withal: His eye begets occasion for his wit; For every object that the one doth catch The other turns to a mirth-moving jest, Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor, Delivers in such apt and gracious words That aged ears play truant at his tales And younger hearings are quite ravished; So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God bless my ladies! are they all in love,That every one her own hath garnishedWith such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet.
Now, what admittance, lord?
Navarre had notice of your fair approach; And he and his competitors in oath Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady, Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt: He rather means to lodge you in the field, Like one that comes here to besiege his court, Than seek a dispensation for his oath, To let you enter his unpeopled house. Here comes Navarre.
Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I havenot yet: the roof of this court is too high to beyours; and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.
Hear me, dear lady; I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise, Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance. I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping: Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord, And sin to break it. But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold: To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me. Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming, And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You will the sooner, that I were away;For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needless was it then to ask the question!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You must not be so quick.
'Tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
What time o' day?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The hour that fools should ask.
Now fair befall your mask!
Fair fall the face it covers!
And send you many lovers!
Amen, so you be none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then will I be gone.
Madam, your father here doth intimate The payment of a hundred thousand crowns; Being but the one half of an entire sum Disbursed by my father in his wars. But say that he or we, as neither have, Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid A hundred thousand more; in surety of the which, One part of Aquitaine is bound to us, Although not valued to the money's worth. If then the king your father will restore But that one half which is unsatisfied, We will give up our right in Aquitaine, And hold fair friendship with his majesty. But that, it seems, he little purposeth, For here he doth demand to have repaid A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands, On payment of a hundred thousand crowns, To have his title live in Aquitaine; Which we much rather had depart withal And have the money by our father lent Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is. Dear Princess, were not his requests so far From reason's yielding, your fair self should make A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the king my father too much wrongAnd wrong the reputation of your name,In so unseeming to confess receiptOf that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heard of it;And if you prove it, I'll repay it backOr yield up Aquitaine.
We arrest your word.Boyet, you can produce acquittancesFor such a sum from special officersOf Charles his father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Satisfy me so.
So please your grace, the packet is not comeWhere that and other specialties are bound:To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me: at which interview All liberal reason I will yield unto. Meantime receive such welcome at my hand As honour without breach of honour may Make tender of to thy true worthiness: You may not come, fair princess, in my gates; But here without you shall be so received As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart, Though so denied fair harbour in my house. Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell: To-morrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.
I would you heard it groan.
Is the fool sick?
Sick at the heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack, let it blood.
Would that do it good?
My physic says 'ay.'
Will you prick't with your eye?
No point, with my knife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, God save thy life!
And yours from long living!
I cannot stay thanksgiving.
Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
Her mother's, I have heard.
God's blessing on your beard!
Good sir, be not offended.She is an heir of Falconbridge.
Nay, my choler is ended.She is a most sweet lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not unlike, sir, that may be.
What's her name in the cap?
Rosaline, by good hap.
Is she wedded or no?
To her will, sir, or so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are welcome, sir: adieu.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord:Not a word with him but a jest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry.
And wherefore not ships?No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so, gentle beast:My lips are no common, though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:This civil war of wits were much better usedOn Navarre and his book-men; for here 'tis abused.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With what?
With that which we lovers entitle affected.
Your reason?
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire: His heart, like an agate, with your print impress'd, Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd: His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see, Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be; All senses to that sense did make their repair, To feel only looking on fairest of fair: Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye, As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy; Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass'd, Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd: His face's own margent did quote such amazes That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes. I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his, An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But to speak that in words which his eye hathdisclosed.I only have made a mouth of his eye,By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.
He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No.
What then, do you see?
Ay, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Concolinel.
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinatelyhither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.
Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
How meanest thou? brawling in French?
No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at the tongue's end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime through the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling love; with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes; with your arms crossed on your thin-belly doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in your pocket like a man after the old painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away . These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men of note—do you note me?—that most are affected to these.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How hast thou purchased this experience?
By my penny of observation.
But O,—but O,—
'The hobby-horse is forgot.'
Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and yourlove perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
Almost I had.
Negligent student! learn her by heart.
By heart and in heart, boy.
And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wilt thou prove?
A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the instant: by heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with her; and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her.
I am all these three.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing atall.
Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassadorfor an ass.
Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.
The way is but short: away!
As swift as lead, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The meaning, pretty ingenious?Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
I say lead is slow.
You are too swift, sir, to say so:Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
Sweet smoke of rhetoric!He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he:I shoot thee at the swain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thump then and I flee.
A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.My herald is return'd.
A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy; begin.
No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in themail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! nol'envoy, no l'envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, and the word l'envoy for a salve?
Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain. I will example it: The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, Were still at odds, being but three. There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,Were still at odds, being but three.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Until the goose came out of door, And stay'd the odds by adding four. Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy. The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,Staying the odds by adding four.
A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would youdesire more?
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat. Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat. To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose: Let me see; a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
True, and I for a plantain: thus came yourargument in;Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;And he ended the market.
But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?
I will tell you sensibly.
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy:I Costard, running out, that was safely within,Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,some goose, in this.
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured,restrained, captivated, bound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let meloose.
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and,in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this:bear this significant
to the country maid Jaquenetta:there is remuneration; for the best ward of minehonour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three farthings—remuneration. —'What's the price of this inkle?'—'One penny.'—'No, I'll give you a remuneration:' why, it carries it. Remuneration! why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of this word.
O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a manbuy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
Stay, slave; I must employ thee:As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
When would you have it done, sir?
This afternoon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
Thou knowest not what it is.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
Why, villain, thou must know first.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It must be done this afternoon. Hark, slave, it is but this: The princess comes to hunt here in the park, And in her train there is a gentle lady; When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name, And Rosaline they call her: ask for her; And to her white hand see thou do commend This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! Iwill do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip; A very beadle to a humorous sigh; A critic, nay, a night-watch constable; A domineering pedant o'er the boy; Than whom no mortal so magnificent! This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy; This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid; Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms, The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans, Liege of all loiterers and malcontents, Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces, Sole imperator and great general Of trotting 'paritors: —O my little heart:— And I to be a corporal of his field, And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop! What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife! A woman, that is like a German clock, Still a-repairing, ever out of frame, And never going aright, being a watch, But being watch'd that it may still go right! Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all; And, among three, to love the worst of all; A wightly wanton with a velvet brow, With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes; Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard: And I to sigh for her! to watch for her! To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague That Cupid will impose for my neglect Of his almighty dreadful little might. Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan: Some men must love my lady and some Joan.
Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hardAgainst the steep uprising of the hill?
I know not; but I think it was not he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whoe'er a' was, a' show'd a mounting mind. Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch: On Saturday we will return to France. Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? first praise me and again say no?O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, madam, fair.
Nay, never paint me now:Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See see, my beauty will be saved by merit! O heresy in fair, fit for these days! A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise. But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill, And shooting well is then accounted ill. Thus will I save my credit in the shoot: Not wounding, pity would not let me do't; If wounding, then it was to show my skill, That more for praise than purpose meant to kill. And out of question so it is sometimes, Glory grows guilty of detested crimes, When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part, We bend to that the working of the heart; As I for praise alone now seek to spill The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereigntyOnly for praise sake, when they strive to beLords o'er their lords?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Only for praise: and praise we may affordTo any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The thickest and the tallest.
The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth. An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit, One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit. Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
What's your will, sir? what's your will?
I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
O, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good friend of mine:Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve;Break up this capon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am bound to serve.This letter is mistook, it importeth none here;It is writ to Jaquenetta.
We will read it, I swear.Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
'By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible; true, that thou art beauteous; truth itself, that thou art lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have commiseration on thy heroical vassal! The magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say, Veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the vulgar,—O base and obscure vulgar!—videlicet, He came, saw, and overcame: he came, one; saw two; overcame, three. Who came? the king: why did he come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. The conclusion is victory: on whose side? the king's. The captive is enriched: on whose side? the beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose side? the king's: no, or both in one, or one in both. I am the king; for so stands the comparison: thou the beggar; for so witnesseth thy lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes; for tittles? titles; for thyself? me. Thus, expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture. and my heart on thy every part. Thine, in the dearest design of industry, ADRIANODE ARMADO.' Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar 'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey. Submissive fall his princely feet before, And he from forage will incline to play: But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then? Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived but I remember the style.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sportTo the prince and his bookmates.
Thou fellow, a word:Who gave thee this letter?
I told you; my lord.
To whom shouldst thou give it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From my lord to my lady.
From which lord to which lady?
From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?
Shall I teach you to know?
Ay, my continent of beauty.
Why, she that bears the bow.Finely put off!
My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.Finely put on!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, then, I am the shooter.
And who is your deer?
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.Finely put on, indeed!
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikesat the brow.
But she herself is hit lower: have I hit her now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that wasa man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, astouching the hit it?
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was awoman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a littlewench, as touching the hit it.
Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
An I cannot, cannot, cannot,An I cannot, another can.
By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
Wide o' the bow hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her tobowl.
I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.
By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown! Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down! O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony vulgar wit! When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit. Armado o' th' one side,—O, a most dainty man! To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan! To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a' will swear! And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit! Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit! Sola, sola!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimonyof a good conscience.
The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab on the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetlyvaried, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, Iassure ye, it was a buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
'Twas not an 'auld grey doe', 'twas a pricket.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it were, replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather, unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a deer.
I said the deer was not an 'auld grey doe', twas a pricket.
Twice-sod simplicity, his coctus!O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in a book; he hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible in the duller parts: And such barren plants are set before us, that we thankful should be, Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that do fructify in us more than he. For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool, So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school: But omne bene, say I; being of an old father's mind, Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
You two are book-men: can you tell me by your witWhat was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not fiveweeks old as yet?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
What is Dictynna?
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,And raught not to five weeks when he came tofive-score.The allusion holds in the exchange.
'Tis true indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holdsin the exchange.
And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange; forthe moon is never but a month old: and I say besidethat, 'twas a pricket that the Princess killed.
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaphon the death of the deer? And, to humour theignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.
Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge; so it shallplease you to abrogate scurrility.
I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility. The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty pleasing pricket; Some say a sore; but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting. The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket; Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting. If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores one sorel. Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A rare talent!
[Aside] If a talent be a claw, look how he clawshim with a talent.
This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a foolish extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions: these are begot in the ventricle of memory, nourished in the womb of pia mater, and delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you; and so may myparishioners; for their sons are well tutored byyou, and their daughters profit very greatly underyou: you are a good member of the commonwealth.
Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shallwant no instruction; if their daughters be capable,I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui paucaloquitur; a soul feminine saluteth us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God give you good morrow, master Person.
Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should bepierced, which is the one?
Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in atuft of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enoughfor a swine: 'tis pretty; it is well.
Good master Parson, be so good as read me thisletter: it was given me by Costard, and sent mefrom Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra Ruminat,—and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice; Venetia, Venetia, Chi non ti vede non ti pretia. Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee not, loves thee not. Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa. Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather, as Horace says in his—What, my soul, verses?
Ay, sir, and very learned.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
[Reads] If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love? Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd! Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove: Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bow'd. Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes, Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend: If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice; Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend, All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder; Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire: Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder, Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire. Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong, That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.
You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the accent: let me supervise the canzonet. Here are only numbers ratified; but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret. Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso, but for smelling out the odouriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of invention? Imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin, was this directed to you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strangequeen's lords.
I will overglance the superscript: 'To the snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.' I will look again on the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party writing to the person written unto: 'Your ladyship's in all desired employment, BIRON.' Sir Nathaniel, this Biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger queen's, which accidentally, or by the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my sweet; deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king: it may concern much. Stay not thy compliment; I forgive thy duty; adieu.
Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
Have with thee, my girl.
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, veryreligiously; and, as a certain father saith,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir tell me not of the father; I do fear colourablecolours. But to return to the verses: did theyplease you, Sir Nathaniel?
Marvellous well for the pen.
I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please you to gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben venuto; where I will prove those verses to be very unlearned, neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention: I beseech your society.
And thank you too; for society, saith the text, isthe happiness of life.
And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I do invite you too; you shall notsay me nay: pauca verba. Away! the gentles are attheir game, and we will to our recreation.
The king he is hunting the deer; I am coursing myself: they have pitched a toil; I am toiling in a pitch,—pitch that defiles: defile! a foul word. Well, set thee down, sorrow! for so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: well proved, wit! By the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, I a sheep: well proved again o' my side! I will not love: if I do, hang me; i' faith, I will not. O, but her eye,—by this light, but for her eye, I would not love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme, and here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my sonnets already: the clown bore it, the fool sent it, and the lady hath it: sweet clown, sweeter fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one with a paper: God give him grace to groan!
Ay me!
[Aside] Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid:thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under theleft pap. In faith, secrets!
[Reads] So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not To those fresh morning drops upon the rose, As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows: Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright Through the transparent bosom of the deep, As doth thy face through tears of mine give light; Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep: No drop but as a coach doth carry thee; So ridest thou triumphing in my woe. Do but behold the tears that swell in me, And they thy glory through my grief will show: But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep My tears for glasses, and still make me weep. O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel, No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell. How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper: Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Ay me, I am forsworn!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
I could put thee in comfort. Not by two that I know:Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move:O sweet Maria, empress of my love!These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:Disfigure not his slop.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This same shall go.
Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye, 'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument, Persuade my heart to this false perjury? Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment. A woman I forswore; but I will prove, Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee: My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love; Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me. Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is: Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine, Exhalest this vapour-vow; in thee it is: If broken then, it is no fault of mine: If by me broke, what fool is not so wise To lose an oath to win a paradise?
This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.
By whom shall I send this?—Company! stay.
All hid, all hid; an old infant play.Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dumain transform'd! four woodcocks in a dish!
O most divine Kate!
O most profane coxcomb!
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.
An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
As upright as the cedar.
Stoop, I say;Her shoulder is with child.
As fair as day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
O that I had my wish!
And I had mine!
And I mine too, good Lord!
Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would forget her; but a fever sheReigns in my blood and will remember'd be.
A fever in your blood! why, then incisionWould let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!
Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
[Reads] On a day—alack the day!— Love, whose month is ever May, Spied a blossom passing fair Playing in the wanton air: Through the velvet leaves the wind, All unseen, can passage find; That the lover, sick to death, Wish himself the heaven's breath. Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow; Air, would I might triumph so! But, alack, my hand is sworn Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn; Vow, alack, for youth unmeet, Youth so apt to pluck a sweet! Do not call it sin in me, That I am forsworn for thee; Thou for whom Jove would swear Juno but an Ethiope were; And deny himself for Jove, Turning mortal for thy love. This will I send, and something else more plain, That shall express my true love's fasting pain. O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville, Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill, Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note; For none offend where all alike do dote.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity.That in love's grief desirest society.You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
[Advancing] Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such; You chide at him, offending twice as much; You do not love Maria? Longaville Did never sonnet for her sake compile, Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart His loving bosom to keep down his heart. I have been closely shrouded in this bush And mark'd you both and for you both did blush: I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion, Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion: Ay me! says one; O Jove! the other cries; One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes:
You would for paradise break faith, and troth;
And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath. What will Biron say when that he shall hear Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear? How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit! How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it! For all the wealth that ever I did see, I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me! Good heart, what grace hast thou, thus to reprove These worms for loving, that art most in love? Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears There is no certain princess that appears; You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing; Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting! But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not, All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot? You found his mote; the king your mote did see; But I a beam do find in each of three. O, what a scene of foolery have I seen, Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of teen! O me, with what strict patience have I sat, To see a king transformed to a gnat! To see great Hercules whipping a gig, And profound Solomon to tune a jig, And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys, And critic Timon laugh at idle toys! Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain? And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain? And where my liege's? all about the breast: A caudle, ho!
Too bitter is thy jest.Are we betray'd thus to thy over-view?
Not you to me, but I betray'd by you: I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin To break the vow I am engaged in; I am betray'd, by keeping company With men like men of inconstancy. When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme? Or groan for love? or spend a minute's time In pruning me? When shall you hear that I Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye, A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist, A leg, a limb?
Soft! whither away so fast?A true man or a thief that gallops so?
I post from love: good lover, let me go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God bless the King!
What present hast thou there?
Some certain treason.
What makes treason here?
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it mar nothing neither,The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:Our parson misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.
Biron, read it over.
Where hadst thou it?
Of Costard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where hadst thou it?
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is Biron's writing, and here is his name.
[To COSTARD] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead! you wereborn to do me shame.Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
What?
That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess:He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is even.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True, true; we are four.Will these turtles be gone?
Hence, sirs; away!
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace! As true we are as flesh and blood can be: The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face; Young blood doth not obey an old decree: We cannot cross the cause why we were born; Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline, That, like a rude and savage man of Inde, At the first opening of the gorgeous east, Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind Kisses the base ground with obedient breast? What peremptory eagle-sighted eye Dares look upon the heaven of her brow, That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;She an attending star, scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron: O, but for my love, day would turn to night! Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek, Where several worthies make one dignity, Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek. Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,— Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not: To things of sale a seller's praise belongs, She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot. A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn, Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye: Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born, And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy: O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O wood divine! A wife of such wood were felicity. O, who can give an oath? where is a book? That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack, If that she learn not of her eye to look: No face is fair that is not full so black.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,The hue of dungeons and the school of night;And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light. O, if in black my lady's brows be deck'd, It mourns that painting and usurping hair Should ravish doters with a false aspect; And therefore is she born to make black fair. Her favour turns the fashion of the days, For native blood is counted painting now; And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise, Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,For fear their colours should be wash'd away.
'Twere good, yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward liesThe street should see as she walk'd overhead.
But what of this? are we not all in love?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
Then leave this chat; and, good Biron, now proveOur loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
O, some authority how to proceed;Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis more than need. Have at you, then, affection's men at arms. Consider what you first did swear unto, To fast, to study, and to see no woman; Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth. Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young; And abstinence engenders maladies. O, we have made a vow to study, lords, And in that vow we have forsworn our books. For when would you, my liege, or you, or you, In leaden contemplation have found out Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with? Other slow arts entirely keep the brain; And therefore, finding barren practisers, Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil: But love, first learned in a lady's eyes, Lives not alone immured in the brain; But, with the motion of all elements, Courses as swift as thought in every power, And gives to every power a double power, Above their functions and their offices. It adds a precious seeing to the eye; A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind; A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound, When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd: Love's feeling is more soft and sensible Than are the tender horns of cockl'd snails; Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste: For valour, is not Love a Hercules, Still climbing trees in the Hesperides? Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair: And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony. Never durst poet touch a pen to write Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs; O, then his lines would ravish savage ears And plant in tyrants mild humility. From women's eyes this doctrine I derive: They sparkle still the right Promethean fire; They are the books, the arts, the academes, That show, contain and nourish all the world: Else none at all in ought proves excellent. Then fools you were these women to forswear, Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools. For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love, Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men, Or for men's sake, the authors of these women, Or women's sake, by whom we men are men, Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves, Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths. It is religion to be thus forsworn, For charity itself fulfills the law, And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by:Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them too: therefore let us deviseSome entertainment for them in their tents.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]First, from the park let us conduct them thither; Then homeward every man attach the hand Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon We will with some strange pastime solace them, Such as the shortness of the time can shape; For revels, dances, masks and merry hours Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
Away, away! no time shall be omittedThat will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn; And justice always whirls in equal measure: Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn; If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
Satis quod sufficit.
I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with- out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with a companion of the King's, who is intituled, nomi- nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
A most singular and choice epithet.
He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and point-devise companions; such rackers of orthography, as to speak dout, sine b, when he should say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt,—d, e, b, t, not d, e, t: he clepeth a calf, cauf; half, hauf; neighbour vocatur nebor; neigh abbreviated ne. This is abhominable,—which he would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of insanie: ne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
Laus Deo, bone intelligo.
Bon, bon, for bene! Priscian a little scratch'd,'twill serve.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Videsne quis venit?
Video, et gaudeo.
Chirrah!
Quare chirrah, not sirrah?
Men of peace, well encountered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most military sir, salutation.
[Aside to COSTARD] They have been at a great feastof languages, and stolen the scraps.
O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words. I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word; for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.
Peace! the peal begins.
[To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lettered?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head?
Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
Quis, quis, thou consonant?
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; orthe fifth, if I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will repeat them,—a, e, i,—
The sheep: the other two concludes it,—o, u.
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweettouch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick andhome! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit!
Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
What is the figure? what is the figure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Horns.
Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip aboutyour infamy manu cita.—a gig of a cuckold's horn.
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from thebarbarous. Do you not educate youth at thecharge-house on the top of the mountain?
Or mons, the hill.
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
I do, sans question.
Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure andaffection to congratulate the Princess at herpavilion in the posteriors of this day, which therude multitude call the afternoon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The posterior of the day, most generous sir, isliable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon:the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I doassure you, sir, I do assure.
Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee, remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy head: and among other important and most serious designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let that pass: for I must tell thee, it will please his grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally with my excrement, with my mustachio; but, sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world; but let that pass. The very all of all is,—but, sweet heart, I do implore secrecy, —that the king would have me present the princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your assistance.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Nathaniel, as concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by our assistants, at the king's command, and this most gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the princess; I say none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Joshua, yourself; this gallant gentleman,Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his greatlimb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; thepage, Hercules,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough forthat Worthy's thumb: he is not so big as the end of hisclub.
Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules inminority: his enter and exit shall be strangling asnake; and I will have an apology for that purpose.
An excellent device! so, if any of the audiencehiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thoucrushest the snake!' that is the way to make anoffence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.
For the rest of the Worthies?—
I will play three myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thrice-worthy gentleman!
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. Ibeseech you, follow.
Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor understood none neither, sir.
Allons! we will employ thee.
I'll make one in a dance, or so; or I will playOn the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,If fairings come thus plentifully in:A lady wall'd about with diamonds!Look you what I have from the loving king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madame, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhymeAs would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,For he hath been five thousand years a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him; a' kill'd your sister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy; And so she died: had she been light, like you, Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit, She might ha' been a grandam ere she died: And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look what you do, you do it still i' the dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.But Rosaline, you have a favour too:Who sent it? and what is it?
I would you knew: An if my face were but as fair as yours, My favour were as great; be witness this. Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron: The numbers true; and, were the numbering too, I were the fairest goddess on the ground: I am compared to twenty thousand fairs. O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Any thing like?
Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink; a good conclusion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
'Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,My red dominical, my golden letter:O, that your face were not so full of O's!
A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?
Madam, this glove.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did he not send you twain?
Yes, madam, and moreoverSome thousand verses of a faithful lover,A huge translation of hypocrisy,Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.
This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:The letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heartThe chain were longer and the letter short?
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so. That same Biron I'll torture ere I go: O that I knew he were but in by the week! How I would make him fawn and beg and seek And wait the season and observe the times And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes And shape his service wholly to my hests And make him proud to make me proud that jests! So pair-taunt-like would I o'ersway his state That he should be my fool and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd,As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd,Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of schoolAnd wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excessAs gravity's revolt to wantonness.
Folly in fools bears not so strong a noteAs foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote;Since all the power thereof it doth applyTo prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her grace?
Thy news Boyet?
Prepare, madam, prepare! Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised, Armed in arguments; you'll be surprised: Muster your wits; stand in your own defence; Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are theyThat charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Under the cool shade of a sycamore I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour; When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest, Toward that shade I might behold addrest The king and his companions: warily I stole into a neighbour thicket by, And overheard what you shall overhear, That, by and by, disguised they will be here. Their herald is a pretty knavish page, That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage: Action and accent did they teach him there; 'Thus must thou speak,' and 'thus thy body bear:' And ever and anon they made a doubt Presence majestical would put him out, 'For,' quoth the king, 'an angel shalt thou see; Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.' The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil; I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.' With that, all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder, Making the bold wag by their praises bolder: One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd and swore A better speech was never spoke before; Another, with his finger and his thumb, Cried, 'Via! we will do't, come what will come;' The third he caper'd, and cried, 'All goes well;' The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell. With that, they all did tumble on the ground, With such a zealous laughter, so profound, That in this spleen ridiculous appears, To cheque their folly, passion's solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus. Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess. Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance; And every one his love-feat will advance Unto his several mistress, which they'll know By favours several which they did bestow.
And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd; For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd; And not a man of them shall have the grace, Despite of suit, to see a lady's face. Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear, And then the king will court thee for his dear; Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine, So shall Biron take me for Rosaline. And change your favours too; so shall your loves Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on, then; wear the favours most in sight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But in this changing what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs: They do it but in mocking merriment; And mock for mock is only my intent. Their several counsels they unbosom shall To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal Upon the next occasion that we meet, With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire to't?
No, to the death, we will not move a foot;Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace,But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,And quite divorce his memory from his part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown, To make theirs ours and ours none but our own: So shall we stay, mocking intended game, And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame.
The trumpet sounds: be mask'd; the maskers come.
All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!—
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
A holy parcel of the fairest dames.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That ever turn'd their—backs—to mortal views!
[Aside to MOTH] Their eyes, villain, their eyes!
That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!—Out—
True; out indeed.
Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafeNot to behold—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to MOTH] Once to behold, rogue.
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,—with your sun-beamed eyes—
They will not answer to that epithet;You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:If they do speak our language, 'tis our will:That some plain man recount their purposesKnow what they would.
What would you with the Princess?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her, we have measured many milesTo tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say, that they have measured many a mileTo tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them how many inchesIs in one mile: if they have measured many,The measure then of one is easily told.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If to come hither you have measured miles,And many miles, the princess bids you tellHow many inches doth fill up one mile.
Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.
She hears herself.
How many weary steps,Of many weary miles you have o'ergone,Are number'd in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you: Our duty is so rich, so infinite, That we may do it still without accompt. Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face, That we, like savages, may worship it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.
Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.Thou bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But your legs should do it.
Since you are strangers and come here by chance,We'll not be nice: take hands. We will not dance.
Why take we hands, then?
Only to part friends:Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We can afford no more at such a price.
Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
Your absence only.
That can never be.
Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu;Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
In private, then.
I am best pleased with that.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice!There's half-a-dozen sweets.
Seventh sweet, adieu:Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gall! bitter.
Therefore meet.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Fair lady,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say you so? Fair lord,—Take that for your fair lady.
Please it you,As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
O for your reason! quickly, sir; I long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have a double tongue within your mask,And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not "veal" a calf?
A calf, fair lady!
No, a fair lord calf.
Let's part the word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I'll not be your halfTake all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.
Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
One word in private with you, ere I die.
Bleat softly then; the butcher hears you cry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen As is the razor's edge invisible, Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen, Above the sense of sense; so sensible Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.
O, they were all in lamentable cases!The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Biron did swear himself out of all suit.
Dumain was at my service, and his sword:Non point, quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart;And trow you what he called me?
Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:Immediately they will again be hereIn their own shapes; for it can never beThey will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?
They will, they will, God knows,And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:Therefore change favours; and, when they repair,Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud;Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do,If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised, Let's, mock them still, as well known as disguised: Let us complain to them what fools were here, Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear; And wonder what they were and to what end Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd And their rough carriage so ridiculous, Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
Fair sir, God save you! Where's the princess?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gone to her tent. Please it your majestyCommand me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease, And utters it again when God doth please: He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs; And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know, Have not the grace to grace it with such show. This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve; Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve; A' can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy; This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice, That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice In honourable terms: nay, he can sing A mean most meanly; and in ushering Mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet; The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet: This is the flower that smiles on every one, To show his teeth as white as whale's bone; And consciences, that will not die in debt, Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,That put Armado's page out of his part!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thouTill this madman show'd thee? and what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
"Fair" in "all hail" is foul, as I conceive.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We came to visit you, and purpose nowTo lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me; and so hold your vow:Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke; For virtue's office never breaks men's troth. Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure As the unsullied lily, I protest, A world of torments though I should endure, I would not yield to be your house's guest; So much I hate a breaking cause to be Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.
O, you have lived in desolation here,Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;We have had pastimes here and pleasant game:A mess of Russians left us but of late.
How, madam! Russians!
Ay, in truth, my lord;Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord: My lady, to the manner of the days, In courtesy gives undeserving praise. We four indeed confronted were with four In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour, And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord, They did not bless us with one happy word. I dare not call them fools; but this I think, When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet, Your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet, With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye, By light we lose light: your capacity Is of that nature that to your huge store Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,—
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
All the fool mine?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard; that superfluous caseThat hid the worse and show'd the better face.
We are descried; they'll mock us now downright.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury. Can any face of brass hold longer out? Here stand I, lady, dart thy skill at me; Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout; Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance; Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit; And I will wish thee never more to dance, Nor never more in Russian habit wait. O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd, Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue, Nor never come in vizard to my friend, Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song! Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise, Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation, Figures pedantical; these summer-flies Have blown me full of maggot ostentation: I do forswear them; and I here protest, By this white glove;—how white the hand, God knows!— Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd In russet yeas and honest kersey noes: And, to begin, wench,—so God help me, la!— My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans sans, I pray you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet I have a trick Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick; I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see: Write, 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three; They are infected; in their hearts it lies; They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes; These lords are visited; you are not free, For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.
It is not so; for how can this be true,That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
Peace! for I will not have to do with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgressionSome fair excuse.
The fairest is confession.Were not you here but even now disguised?
Madam, I was.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam.
When you then were here,What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Upon mine honour, no.
Peace, peace! forbear:Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.
I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dearAs precious eyesight, and did value meAbove this world; adding thereto moreoverThat he would wed me, or else die my lover.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God give thee joy of him! the noble lordMost honourably doth unhold his word.
What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,I never swore this lady such an oath.
By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
My faith and this the princess I did give:I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Neither of either; I remit both twain. I see the trick on't: here was a consent, Knowing aforehand of our merriment, To dash it like a Christmas comedy: Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany, Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick, That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick To make my lady laugh when she's disposed, Told our intents before; which once disclosed, The ladies did change favours: and then we, Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she. Now, to our perjury to add more terror, We are again forsworn, in will and error. Much upon this it is: and might not you.
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue? Do not you know my lady's foot by the squier, And laugh upon the apple of her eye? And stand between her back, sir, and the fire, Holding a trencher, jesting merrily? You put our page out: go, you are allow'd; Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud. You leer upon me, do you? there's an eye Wounds like a leaden sword.
Full merrilyHath this brave manage, this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.
Welcome, pure wit! thou partest a fair fray.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, sir, they would knowWhether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
What, are there but three?
No, sir; but it is vara fine,For every one pursents three.
And three times thrice is nine.
Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we knowwhat we know:I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is not nine.
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your livingby reckoning, sir.
How much is it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mineown part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one manin one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir.
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion theGreat: for mine own part, I know not the degree ofthe Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turn it finely off, sir; we will takesome care.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policyTo have one show worse than the king's and his company.
I say they shall not come.
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now: That sport best pleases that doth least know how: Where zeal strives to content, and the contents Dies in the zeal of that which it presents: Their form confounded makes most form in mirth, When great things labouring perish in their birth.
A right description of our sport, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royalsweet breath as will utter a brace of words.
Doth this man serve God?
Why ask you?
He speaks not like a man of God's making.
That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too, too vain, too too vain: but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra. I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He presents Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate, Alexander; Armado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive, These four will change habits, and present the other five.
There is five in the first show.
You are deceived; 'tis not so.
The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fooland the boy:—Abate throw at novum, and the whole world againCannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I Pompey am,—
You lie, you are not he.
I Pompey am,—
With leopard's head on knee.
Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friendswith thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big—
The Great.
It is, 'Great,' sir:— Pompey surnamed the Great; That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to sweat: And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance, And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France, If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
Great thanks, great Pompey.
'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect: Imade a little fault in 'Great.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
When in the world I lived, I was the world'scommander;By east, west, north, and south, I spread myconquering might:My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,—
Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.
Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.
The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alexander.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When in the world I lived, I was the world'scommander,—
Most true, 'tis right; you were so, Alisander.
Pompey the Great,—
Your servant, and Costard.
Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To SIR NATHANIEL] O, sir, you have overthrown Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror, and afeard to speak! run away for shame, Alisander.
There, an't shall please you; a foolish mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dashed. He is a marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler: but, for Alisander,—alas, you see how 'tis,—a little o'erparted. But there are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
Great Hercules is presented by this imp, Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis; And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp, Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus. Quoniam he seemeth in minority, Ergo I come with this apology. Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
Judas I am,—
A Judas!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not Iscariot, sir.Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
Judas I am,—
The more shame for you, Judas.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What mean you, sir?
To make Judas hang himself.
Begin, sir; you are my elder.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A cittern-head.
The head of a bodkin.
A Death's face in a ring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
The pommel of Caesar's falchion.
The carved-bone face on a flask.
Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.
Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.And now forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
You have put me out of countenance.
False; we have given thee faces.
But you have out-faced them all.
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the ass to the Jude; give it him:—Jud-as, away!
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.
Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
But is this Hector?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
His leg is too big for Hector's.
More calf, certain.
No; he is best endued in the small.
This cannot be Hector.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,Gave Hector a gift,—
A gilt nutmeg.
A lemon.
Stuck with cloves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, cloven.
Peace!— The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion; A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea From morn till night, out of his pavilion. I am that flower,—
That mint.
That columbine.
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.
Ay, and Hector's a greyhound.
The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed,he was a man. But I will forward with my device.
Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Speak, brave Hector: we are much delighted.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
[Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot,—
[Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.
This Hector far surmounted Hannibal,—
The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; sheis two months on her way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What meanest thou?
Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poorwench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags inher belly already: tis yours.
Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shaltdie.
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that isquick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead byhim.
Most rare Pompey!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Renowned Pompey!
Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!Pompey the Huge!
Hector trembles.
Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir themon! stir them on!
Hector will challenge him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than willsup a flea.
By the north pole, I do challenge thee.
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:I'll slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,let me borrow my arms again.
Room for the incensed Worthies!
I'll do it in my shirt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most resolute Pompey!
Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do younot see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What meanyou? You will lose your reputation.
Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combatin my shirt.
You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What reason have you for't?
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt; I gowoolward for penance.
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want oflinen: since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none buta dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that a' wears nexthis heart for a favour.
God save you, madam!
Welcome, Mercade;But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sorry, madam; for the news I bringIs heavy in my tongue. The king your father—
Dead, for my life!
Even so; my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.
For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I haveseen the day of wrong through the little hole ofdiscretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How fares your majesty?
Boyet, prepare; I will away tonight.
Madam, not so; I do beseech you, stay.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords, For all your fair endeavors; and entreat, Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide The liberal opposition of our spirits, If over-boldly we have borne ourselves In the converse of breath: your gentleness Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord! A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue: Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks For my great suit so easily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms All causes to the purpose of his speed, And often at his very loose decides That which long process could not arbitrate: And though the mourning brow of progeny Forbid the smiling courtesy of love The holy suit which fain it would convince, Yet, since love's argument was first on foot, Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it From what it purposed; since, to wail friends lost Is not by much so wholesome-profitable As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I understand you not: my griefs are double.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief; And by these badges understand the king. For your fair sakes have we neglected time, Play'd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies, Hath much deform'd us, fashioning our humours Even to the opposed end of our intents: And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,— As love is full of unbefitting strains, All wanton as a child, skipping and vain, Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye, Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms, Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll To every varied object in his glance: Which parti-coated presence of loose love Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes, Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities, Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults, Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies, Our love being yours, the error that love makes Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false, By being once false for ever to be true To those that make us both,—fair ladies, you: And even that falsehood, in itself a sin, Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love; Your favours, the ambassadors of love; And, in our maiden council, rated them At courtship, pleasant jest and courtesy, As bombast and as lining to the time: But more devout than this in our respects Have we not been; and therefore met your loves In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.
So did our looks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We did not quote them so.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,Grant us your loves.
A time, methinks, too short To make a world-without-end bargain in. No, no, my lord, your grace is perjured much, Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this: If for my love, as there is no such cause, You will do aught, this shall you do for me: Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed To some forlorn and naked hermitage, Remote from all the pleasures of the world; There stay until the twelve celestial signs Have brought about the annual reckoning. If this austere insociable life Change not your offer made in heat of blood; If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love, But that it bear this trial and last love; Then, at the expiration of the year, Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts, And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine I will be thine; and till that instant shut My woeful self up in a mourning house, Raining the tears of lamentation For the remembrance of my father's death. If this thou do deny, let our hands part, Neither entitled in the other's heart.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.
But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A beard, fair health, and honesty;With three-fold love I wish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a dayI'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:Come when the king doth to my lady come;Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What says Maria?
At the twelvemonth's endI'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? mistress, look on me;Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,What humble suit attends thy answer there:Impose some service on me for thy love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron, Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks, Full of comparisons and wounding flouts, Which you on all estates will execute That lie within the mercy of your wit. To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain, And therewithal to win me, if you please, Without the which I am not to be won, You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day Visit the speechless sick and still converse With groaning wretches; and your task shall be, With all the fierce endeavor of your wit To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?It cannot be; it is impossible:Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit, Whose influence is begot of that loose grace Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools: A jest's prosperity lies in the ear Of him that hears it, never in the tongue Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears, Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans, Will hear your idle scorns, continue then, And I will have you and that fault withal; But if they will not, throw away that spirit, And I shall find you empty of that fault, Right joyful of your reformation.
A twelvemonth! well; befall what will befall,I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
[To FERDINAND] Ay, sweet my lord; and so I take my leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play;Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesyMight well have made our sport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,And then 'twill end.
That's too long for a play.
Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was not that Hector?
The worthy knight of Troy.
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a votary; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her sweet love three years. But, most esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in praise of the owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the end of our show.
Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
Holla! approach.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;the one maintained by the owl, the other by thecuckoo. Ver, begin.
SPRING. When daisies pied and violets blue And lady-smocks all silver-white And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue Do paint the meadows with delight, The cuckoo then, on every tree, Mocks married men; for thus sings he, Cuckoo; Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear, Unpleasing to a married ear! When shepherds pipe on oaten straws And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks, When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws, And maidens bleach their summer smocks The cuckoo then, on every tree, Mocks married men; for thus sings he, Cuckoo; Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear, Unpleasing to a married ear!WINTER.When icicles hang by the wallAnd Dick the shepherd blows his nailAnd Tom bears logs into the hallAnd milk comes frozen home in pail,When blood is nipp'd and ways be foul,Then nightly sings the staring owl, Tu-whit;Tu-who, a merry note,While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.When all aloud the wind doth blowAnd coughing drowns the parson's sawAnd birds sit brooding in the snowAnd Marian's nose looks red and raw,When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,Then nightly sings the staring owl, Tu-whit;Tu-who, a merry note,While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs ofApollo. You that way: we this way.
When shall we three meet again?In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
When the hurly-burly’s done,When the battle’s lost and won.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That will be ere the set of sun.
Where the place?
Upon the heath.
There to meet with Macbeth.
I come, Graymalkin!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Paddock calls.
Anon.
Fair is foul, and foul is fairHover through the fog and filthy air.
What bloody man is that? He can report,As seemeth by his plight, of the revoltThe newest state.
This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought ‘Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doubtful it stood, As two spent swimmers that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him— from the Western Isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied, And fortune, on his damnèd quarrel smiling, Showed like a rebel’s whore. But all’s too weak, For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valor’s minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave; Which ne’er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, Till he unseamed him from the nave to th’ chops, And fixed his head upon our battlements.
O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
As whence the sun ‘gins his reflection Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seemed to come Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had, with valor armed, Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage, With furbished arms and new supplies of men, Began a fresh assault.
Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
Yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. If I say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe. Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorize another Golgotha, I cannot tell— But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;They smack of honor both. Go get him surgeons.
Who comes here?
The worthy thane of Ross.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he lookThat seems to speak things strange.
God save the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?
From Fife, great king, Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, with terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor, The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict, Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapped in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point, rebellious arm ‘gainst arm, Curbing his lavish spirit; and to conclude, The victory fell on us.
Great happiness!
That now Sweno, the Norways’ king, craves composition. Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme’s Inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceiveOur bosom interest: go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll see it done.
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
Where hast thou been, sister?
Killing swine.
Sister, where thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munched, and munched, and munched. “Give me,” quoth I. “Aroint thee, witch!” the rump-fed runnion cries. Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ th’ Tiger; But in a sieve I’ll thither sail, And like a rat without a tail, I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.
I’ll give thee a wind.
Thou ‘rt kind.
And I another.
I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I’ th’ shipman’s card. I’ll drain him dry as hay. Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his penthouse lid. He shall live a man forbid. Weary sev’nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle, peak and pine. Though his bark cannot be lost, Yet it shall be tempest-tossed. Look what I have.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Show me, show me.
Here I have a pilot’s thumb,Wrecked as homeward he did come.
A drum, a drum!Macbeth doth come.
[dancing together in a circle] The weird sisters, hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about, Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine. Peace! The charm’s wound up.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How far is ’t called to Forres? —What are these So withered and so wild in their attire, That look not like th’ inhabitants o’ th’ Earth, And yet are on ’t? —Live you? Or are you aught That man may question? You seem to understand me, By each at once her choppy finger laying Upon her skinny lips. You should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.
Speak, if you can: what are you?
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, thane of Glamis!
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair [to the WITCHES] I’ th’ name of truth, are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show? ? My noble partner You greet with present grace and great predictionOf noble having and of royal hope, That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not. If you can look into the seeds of timeAnd say which grain will grow and which will not, Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favors nor your hate.
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so happy, yet much happier.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more. By Sinel’s death I know I am thane of Glamis. But how of Cawdor? The thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman, and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence, or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Into the air, and what seemed corporalMelted, as breath into the wind. Would they had stayed.
Were such things here as we do speak about? Or have we eaten on the insane rootThat takes the reason prisoner?
Your children shall be kings.
You shall be king.
And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To the selfsame tune and words. Who’s here?
The king hath happily received, Macbeth, The news of thy success, and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels’ fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that, In viewing o’er the rest o’ the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as tale Can post with post, and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom’s great defense, And poured them down before him.
We are sentTo give thee from our royal master thanks,Only to herald thee into his sight,Not pay thee.
And, for an earnest of a greater honor, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane, For it is thine.
What, can the devil speak true?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me In borrowed robes?
Who was the thane lives yet, But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both He labored in his country’s wrack, I know not; But treasons capital, confessed and proved, Have overthrown him.
[aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind. [to ROSS and ANGUS] Thanks for your pains. [aside to BANQUO] Do you not hope your children shall be kings, When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me Promised no less to them?
That, trusted home, Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange. And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray ’s In deepest consequence. [to ROSS and ANGUS] Cousins, a word, I pray you.
[aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme. [to ROSS and ANGUS] I thank you,gentlemen. [aside] This supernatural soliciting Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor. If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings. My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man That function is smothered in surmise, And nothing is but what is not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look how our partner’s rapt.
[aside] If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown meWithout my stir.
New honors come upon him, Like our strange garments, cleave not to their moldBut with the aid of use.
[aside] Come what come may,Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains Are registered where every day I turn The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king. [aside to BANQUO] Think upon what hath chanced, and, atmore time, The interim having weighed it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.
Very gladly.
Till then, enough. [to ROSS and ANGUS] Come, friends.
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are notThose in commission yet returned?
My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die, who did report That very frankly he confessed his treasons, Implored your highness’ pardon, and set forth A deep repentance. Nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it. He died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed As ’twere a careless trifle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There’s no art To find the mind’s construction in the face. He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust.
[to MACBETH] O worthiest cousin, The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved, That the proportion both of thanks and payment Might have been mine! Only I have left to say, More is thy due than more than all can pay.
The service and the loyalty I owe In doing it pays itself. Your highness’ part Is to receive our duties, and our duties Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing everything Safe toward your love and honor.
Welcome hither. I have begun to plant thee, and will labor To make thee full of growing. [to BANQUO] Noble Banquo, That hast no less deserved, nor must be known No less to have done so, let me infold thee And hold thee to my heart.
There, if I grow,The harvest is your own.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My plenteous joys, Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, And you whose places are the nearest, know We will establish our estate upon Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The prince of Cumberland; which honor must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers. [to MACBETH] From hence to Inverness, And bind us further to you.
The rest is labor which is not used for you: I’ll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach. So humbly take my leave.
My worthy Cawdor!
[aside] The prince of Cumberland! That is a step On which I must fall down, or else o’erleap, For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires. The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me.—Let’s after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reading] “They met me in the day of success, and I have learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives from the king, who all-hailed me ‘Thane of Cawdor,’ by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time with ‘Hail, king that shalt be!’ This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.” Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o’ th’ milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great, Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou’ld’st have, great Glamis, That which cries, “Thus thou must do,” if thou have it, And that which rather thou dost fear to do, Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear And chastise with the valor of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round, Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem To have thee crowned withal.
What is your tidings?
The king comes here tonight.
Thou ‘rt mad to say it. Is not thy master with him, who, were ’t so,Would have informed for preparation?
So please you, it is true: our thane is coming. One of my fellows had the speed of him, Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more Than would make up his message.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give him tending.He brings great news.
The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood. Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman’s breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murd’ring ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature’s mischief. Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark To cry “Hold, hold!”
Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor, Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter, Thy letters have transported me beyond This ignorant present, and I feel now The future in the instant.
My dearest love, Duncan comes here tonight.
And when goes hence?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tomorrow, as he purposes.
O, never Shall sun that morrow see! Your face, my thane, is as a book where men May read strange matters. To beguile the time, Look like the time. Bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue. Look like th’ innocent flower, But be the serpent under ’t. He that’s coming Must be provided for; and you shall put This night’s great business into my dispatch, Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
We will speak further.
Only look up clear.To alter favor ever is to fear. Leave all the rest to me.
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The airNimbly and sweetly recommends itselfUnto our gentle senses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breath Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.
See, see, our honored hostess! The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you How you shall bid God ‘ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.
All our service, In every point twice done and then done double, Were poor and single business to contend Against those honors deep and broad wherewith Your majesty loads our house. For those of old, And the late dignities heaped up to them, We rest your hermits.
Where’s the thane of Cawdor? We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose To be his purveyor; but he rides well, And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess, We are your guest tonight.
Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt , To make their audit at your highness’ pleasure, Still to return your own.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me your hand. Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly And shall continue our graces towards him. By your leave, hostess.
If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well It were done quickly. If the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here, that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague th’ inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice To our own lips. He’s here in double trust: First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked newborn babe, Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself And falls on th’ other.
How now! What news?
He has almost supped. Why have you left the chamber?
Hath he asked for me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know you not he has?
We will proceed no further in this business. He hath honored me of late, and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.
Was the hope drunk Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since? And wakes it now, to look so green and pale At what it did so freely? From this time Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valor As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would, ” Like the poor cat i’ th’ adage?
Prithee, peace:I dare do all that may become a man;Who dares do more is none.
What beast was ’t, then, That made you break this enterprise to me? When you durst do it, then you were a man; And to be more than what you were, you would Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both. They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me. I would, while it was smiling in my face, Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you Have done to this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If we should fail?
We fail? But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenchèd natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? What not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?
Bring forth men-children only, For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, When we have marked with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done ’t?
Who dares receive it other,As we shall make our griefs and clamor roarUpon his death?
I am settled, and bend up Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. Away, and mock the time with fairest show. False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How goes the night, boy?
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.
And she goes down at twelve.
I take ’t ’tis later, sir.
Hold, take my sword. There’s husbandry in heaven; Their candles are all out. Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursèd thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me my sword. Who’s there?
A friend.
What, sir, not yet at rest? The king’s a-bed. He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up In measureless content.
Being unprepared,Our will became the servant to defect,Which else should free have wrought.
All’s well.I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters: To you they have showed some truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think not of them. Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, We would spend it in some words upon that business, If you would grant the time.
At your kind’st leisure.
If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis, It shall make honor for you.
So I lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counselled.
Good repose the while!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, sir: the like to you!
[to the SERVANT] Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
Is this a dagger which I see before me, The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee. I have thee not, and yet I see thee still. Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain? I see thee yet, in form as palpable As this which now I draw. Thou marshall’st me the way that I was going, And such an instrument I was to use. Mine eyes are made the fools o’ th’ other senses, Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before. There’s no such thing. It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o’er the one half-world Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate’s offerings, and withered murder, Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives. Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knellThat summons thee to heaven or to hell.
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold. What hath quenched them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace! It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern’st good-night. He is about it. The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Who’s there? What, ho!
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, And ’tis not done. Th’ attempt and not the deed Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready; He could not miss ‘em. Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done ’t.
My husband!
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.Did not you speak?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When?
Now.
As I descended?
Ay.
Hark! Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Donalbain.
[looking at his hands] This is a sorry sight.
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
There’s one did laugh in ’s sleep, and one cried. “Murder!” That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them. But they did say their prayers, and addressed them Again to sleep.
There are two lodged together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One cried, “God bless us!” and “Amen” the other, As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands. List’ning their fear I could not say “Amen,” When they did say “God bless us!”
Consider it not so deeply.
But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen?”I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”Stuck in my throat.
These deeds must not be thoughtAfter these ways. So, it will make us mad.
Methought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep”—the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care, The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course, Chief nourisher in life’s feast.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What do you mean?
Still it cried, “Sleep no more!” to all the house.“Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore CawdorShall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.”
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane, You do unbend your noble strength to think So brainsickly of things. Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand. Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there. Go carry them and smear The sleepy grooms with blood.
I’ll go no more:I am afraid to think what I have done;Look on ’t again I dare not.
Infirm of purpose! Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures. ‘Tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed, I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal, For it must seem their guilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whence is that knocking? How is ’t with me when every noise appals me? What hands are here? Ha! They pluck out mine eyes. Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas incarnadine, Making the green one red.
My hands are of your color, but I shame To wear a heart so white.
I hear a knocking At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber. A little water clears us of this deed. How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended.
Hark! More knocking. Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us And show us to be watchers. Be not lost So poorly in your thoughts.
To know my deed, ’twere best not know myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou couldst.
Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.
Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there, i’ th’ name of Beelzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty. Come in time, have napkins enoughabout you, here you’ll sweat for ’t.
Knock, knock! Who’s there, in th’ other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator that could swear in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough for God’s sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. O, come in, equivocator.
Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there? Faith, here’s an English tailor come hither for stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor. Here you may roast your goose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Knock, knock! Never at quiet. What are you? But this place is too cold for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further. I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.
Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,That you do lie so late?
‘Faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock. Anddrink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.
What three things does drink especially provoke?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes the desire,but it takes away the performance. Therefore, much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery. It makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takeshim off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
That it did, sir, i’ th’ very throat on me; but I requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too strongfor him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet I madea shift to cast him.
Is thy master stirring?
Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, noble sir.
Good morrow, both.
Is the king stirring, worthy thane?
Not yet.
He did command me to call timely on him.I have almost slipped the hour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll bring you to him.
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,But yet ’tis one.
The labor we delight in physics pain.This is the door.
I’ll make so bold to call,For ’tis my limited service.
Goes the king hence today?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He does. He did appoint so.
The night has been unruly. Where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say, Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatched to the woeful time. The obscure bird Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth Was feverous and did shake.
‘Twas a rough night.
My young remembrance cannot parallelA fellow to it.
O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s the matter?
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece. Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope The Lord’s anointed temple, and stole thence The life o’ th’ building!
What is ’t you say? “The life?”
Mean you his majesty?
Approach the chamber, and destroy your sightWith a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.See, and then speak yourselves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Awake, awake! Ring the alarum bell. Murder and treason! Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! Awake! Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit, And look on death itself! Up, up, and see The great doom’s image! Malcolm! Banquo! As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.
What’s the business,That such a hideous trumpet calls to parleyThe sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
O gentle lady, ‘Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman’s ear, Would murder as it fell.
O Banquo, Banquo,Our royal master’s murdered!
Woe, alas!What, in our house?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Too cruel any where.Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,And say it is not so.
Had I but died an hour before this chance, I had lived a blessèd time, for from this instant There’s nothing serious in mortality. All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead. The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.
What is amiss?
You are, and do not know ’t.The spring, the head, the fountain of your bloodIs stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
Your royal father’s murdered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, by whom?
Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done ’t. Their hands and faces were all badged with blood. So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows. They stared, and were distracted. No man’s life was to be trusted with them.
Oh, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.
Wherefore did you so?
Who can be wise, amazed, temp’rate, and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man. Th’ expedition of my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood, And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature For ruin’s wasteful entrance; there, the murderers, Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make ’s love known?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Help me hence, ho!
Look to the lady.
[aside to DONALBAIN] Why do we hold our tongues, That most may claim this argument for ours?
[aside to MALCOLM] What should be spoken here, where our fate,Hid in an auger-hole, may rush and seize us?Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brewed.
[aside to DONALBAIN] Nor our strong sorrow Upon the foot of motion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look to the lady.
And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us. In the great hand of God I stand, and thence Against the undivulged pretense I fight Of treasonous malice.
And so do I.
So all.
Let’s briefly put on manly readiness, And meet i’ th’ hall together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well contented.
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them.To show an unfelt sorrow is an officeWhich the false man does easy. I’ll to England.
To Ireland, I. Our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are, There’s daggers in men’s smiles. The near in blood, The nearer bloody.
This murderous shaft that’s shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse, And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft Which steals itself when there’s no mercy left.
Threescore and ten I can remember well, Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, good father, Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man’s act, Threatens his bloody stage. By th’ clock ’tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp. Is ’t night’s predominance or the day’s shame That darkness does the face of Earth entomb When living light should kiss it?
‘Tis unnatural, Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, tow’ring in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
And Duncan’s horses—a thing most strange and certain— Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending ‘gainst obedience, as they would Make war with mankind.
‘Tis said they eat each other.
They did so, to th’ amazement of mine eyes That looked upon ’t. Here comes the good Macduff.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How goes the world, sir, now?
Why, see you not?
Is ’t known who did this more than bloody deed?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
Alas, the day!What good could they pretend?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They were suborned. Malcolm and Donalbain, the king’s two sons, Are stol’n away and fled, which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed.
‘Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that will raven up Thine own lives’ means! Then ’tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
He is already named and gone to SconeTo be invested.
Where is Duncan’s body?
Carried to Colmekill,The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,And guardian of their bones.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you to Scone?
No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.
Well, I will thither.
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
Farewell, father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God’s benison go with you and with thoseThat would make good of bad and friends of foes.
Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and I fear Thou played’st most foully for ’t. Yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.
Here’s our chief guest.
If he had been forgotten,It had been as a gap in our great feast,And all-thing unbecoming.
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,And I’ll request your presence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let your highnessCommand upon me, to the which my dutiesAre with a most indissoluble tieForever knit.
Ride you this afternoon?
Ay, my good lord.
We should have else desired your good advice— Which still hath been both grave and prosperous— In this day’s council, but we’ll take tomorrow. Is ’t far you ride?
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time ‘Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better, I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fail not our feast.
My lord, I will not.
We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention. But of that tomorrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu, Till your return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon ’s.
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot, And so I do commend you to their backs.Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night. To make society The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you!
Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those menOur pleasure?
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
Bring them before us.
To be thus is nothing, But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be feared. ‘Tis much he dares, And to that dauntless temper of his mind He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor To act in safety. There is none but he Whose being I do fear, and under him My genius is rebuked, as it is said Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me And bade them speak to him. Then, prophetlike, They hailed him father to a line of kings. Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown And put a barren scepter in my grip, Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If ’t be so, For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered; Put rancors in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings! Rather than so, come fate into the list, And champion me to th’ utterance. Who’s there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now go to the door and stay there till we call.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
It was, so please your highness.
Well then, now Have you considered of my speeches? Know That it was he, in the times past, which held you So under fortune, which you thought had been Our innocent self. This I made good to you In our last conference, passed in probation with you, How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the instruments, Who wrought with them, and all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say, “Thus did Banquo.”
You made it known to us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did so, and went further, which is now Our point of second meeting. Do you find Your patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled To pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave And beggared yours forever?
We are men, my liege.
Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men, As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept All by the name of dogs. The valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive Particular addition, from the bill That writes them all alike. And so of men. Now, if you have a station in the file, Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say ’t, And I will put that business in your bosoms, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.
I am one, my liege, Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world.
And I another So weary with disasters, tugged with fortune, That I would set my life on any chance, To mend it or be rid on ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Both of youKnow Banquo was your enemy.
True, my lord.
So is he mine; and in such bloody distance That every minute of his being thrusts Against my near’st of life. And though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down. And thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.
We shall, my lord,Perform what you command us.
Though our lives—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most I will advise you where to plant yourselves, Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time, The moment on ’t; for ’t must be done tonight, And something from the palace; always thought That I require a clearness. And with him— To leave no rubs nor botches in the work— Fleance, his son, that keeps him company, Whose absence is no less material to me Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart. I’ll come to you anon.
We are resolved, my lord.
I’ll call upon you straight. Abide within.
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
Is Banquo gone from court?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
Say to the king I would attend his leisureFor a few words.
Madam, I will.
Naught’s had, all’s spent, Where our desire is got without content. ‘Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
How now, my lord! Why do you keep alone, Of sorriest fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on? Things without all remedy Should be without regard. What’s done is done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have scorched the snake, not killed it. She’ll close and be herself whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave. After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well. Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing Can touch him further.
Come on, gentle my lord, Sleek o’er your rugged looks. Be bright and jovialAmong your guests tonight.
So shall I, love, And so, I pray, be you. Let your remembrance Apply to Banquo; present him eminence, Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we Must lave our honors in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.
You must leave this.
Oh, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!Thou know’st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.
There’s comfort yet; they are assailable. Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.
What’s to be done?
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow Makes wing to th’ rooky wood. Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do rouse. Thou marvel’st at my words: but hold thee still. Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. So, prithee, go with me.
But who did bid thee join with us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Macbeth.
He needs not our mistrust, since he deliversOur offices and what we have to do To the direction just.
Then stand with us. The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. Now spurs the lated traveler apace To gain the timely inn, and near approaches The subject of our watch.
Hark, I hear horses.
[within] Give us a light there, ho!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then ’tis he: the restThat are within the note of expectationAlready are i’ th’ court.
His horses go about.
Almost a mile; but he does usually— So all men do—from hence to the palace gateMake it their walk.
A light, a light!
‘Tis he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand to ’t.
It will be rain tonight.
Let it come down.
O treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly! Thou may ’st revenge —O slave!
Who did strike out the light?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was ’t not the way?
There’s but one down. The son is fled.
We have lost best half of our affair.
Well, let’s away and say how much is done.
You know your own degrees; sit down. At firstAnd last, the hearty welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks to your majesty.
Ourself will mingle with society And play the humble host. Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,For my heart speaks they are welcome.
See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks. Both sides are even. Here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst. Be large in mirth. Anon we’ll drink a measure The table round. [aside to FIRST MURDERER] There’s blood upon thy face.
‘Tis Banquo’s then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis better thee without than he within.Is he dispatched?
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.
Thou art the best o’ th’ cutthroats:Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance. If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.
Most royal sir, Fleance is ’scaped.
Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect, Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air. But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears.—But Banquo’s safe?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,With twenty trenchèd gashes on his head,The least a death to nature.
Thanks for that. There the grown serpent lies. The worm that’s fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed; No teeth for th’ present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow We’ll hear ourselves again.
My royal lord, You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold That is not often vouched, while ’tis a-making, ‘Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home; From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony; Meeting were bare without it.
Sweet remembrancer!Now, good digestion wait on appetite, And health on both!
May ’t please your highness sit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here had we now our country’s honor roofed, Were the graced person of our Banquo present, Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance.
His absence, sir,Lays blame upon his promise. Please ’t your highnessTo grace us with your royal company?
The table’s full.
Here is a place reserved, sir.
Where?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, my good lord. What is ’t that moves your highness?
Which of you have done this?
What, my good lord?
[to GHOST] Thou canst not say I did it. Never shakeThy gory locks at me.
Gentlemen, rise. His highness is not well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat. The fit is momentary; upon a thought He will again be well. If much you note him, You shall offend him and extend his passion. Feed and regard him not. [aside to MACBETH] Are you a man?
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on thatWhich might appall the devil.
O proper stuff! This is the very painting of your fear. This is the air-drawn dagger which you said Led you to Duncan. Oh, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman’s story at a winter’s fire, Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself! Why do you make such faces? When all’s done, You look but on a stool.
Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you? Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too. If charnel houses and our graves must send Those that we bury back, our monuments Shall be the maws of kites.
What, quite unmanned in folly?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I stand here, I saw him.
Fie, for shame!
Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time, Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been performed Too terrible for the ear. The time has been That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end. But now they rise again With twenty mortal murders on their crowns And push us from our stools. This is more strange Than such a murder is.
My worthy lord,Your noble friends do lack you.
I do forget. Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends. I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me. Come, love and health to all. Then I’ll sit down. Give me some wine. Fill full.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I drink to the general joy o’ th’ whole table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss; Would he were here! To all and him we thirst, And all to all.
Our duties, and the pledge.
[seeing the GHOST] Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee. Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold. Thou hast no speculation in those eyes Which thou dost glare with!
Think of this, good peers,But as a thing of custom. ‘Tis no other;Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
What man dare, I dare. Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, The armed rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger; Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble. Or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword. If trembling I inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow! Unreal mockery, hence!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why so, being gone,I am a man again. Pray you sit still.
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,With most admired disorder.
Can such things be, And overcome us like a summer’s cloud, Without our special wonder? You make me strange Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.
What sights, my lord?
I pray you, speak not. He grows worse and worse. Question enrages him. At once, good night. Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good night, and better healthAttend his majesty!
A kind good night to all!
It will have blood, they say. Blood will have blood. Stones have been known to move, and trees to speak. Augurs and understood relations have By magot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret’st man of blood. —What is the night?
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
How say’st thou that Macduff denies his person At our great bidding?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did you send to him, sir?
I hear it by the way; but I will send. There’s not a one of them but in his house I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow— And betimes I will—to the weird sisters. More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, All causes shall give way. I am in blood Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o’er. Strange things I have in head, that will to hand, Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuseIs the initiate fear that wants hard use. We are yet but young in deed.
Why, how now, Hecate! You look angerly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have I not reason, beldams as you are? Saucy and overbold, how did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death, And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never called to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now. Get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i’ th’ morning. Thither he Will come to know his destiny. Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and everything beside. I am for the air. This night I’ll spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end. Great business must be wrought ere noon. Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vap’rous drop profound. I’ll catch it ere it come to ground. And that distilled by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion. He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear His hopes ‘bove wisdom, grace, and fear. And you all know, security Is mortals’ chiefest enemy.
Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.
Come, let’s make haste; she’ll soon be back again.
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret farther. Only I say Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth. Marry, he was dead. And the right-valiant Banquo walked too late, Whom, you may say, if ’t please you, Fleance killed, For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father? Damnèd fact! How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too, For ’twould have angered any heart alive To hear the men deny ’t. So that, I say, He has borne all things well. And I do think That had he Duncan’s sons under his key— As, an’t please heaven, he shall not—they should find What ’twere to kill a father. So should Fleance. But, peace! For from broad words, and ‘cause he failed His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?
The son of Duncan— From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth— Lives in the English court and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward , That by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honors. All which we pine for now. And this report Hath so exasperated the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sent he to Macduff?
He did, and with an absolute “Sir, not I,” The cloudy messenger turns me his back, And hums, as who should say “You’ll rue the time That clogs me with this answer.”
And that well might Advise him to a caution, t’ hold what distance His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel Fly to the court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!
I’ll send my prayers with him.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
Harpier cries, “‘Tis time, ’tis time.”
Round about the cauldron go, In the poisoned entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Sweltered venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i’ th’ charmèd pot.
Double, double toil and trouble,Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake. Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder’s fork and blind-worm’s sting, Lizard’s leg and owlet’s wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Double, double toil and trouble,Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches’ mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravined salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digged i’ th’ dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat and slips of yew Slivered in the moon’s eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar’s lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-delivered by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab. Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.
Double, double toil and trouble,Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
Cool it with a baboon’s blood,Then the charm is firm and good.
Oh well done! I commend your pains, And every one shall share i’ th’ gains . And now about the cauldron sing, Like elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes. Open, locks, Whoever knocks.
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?What is ’t you do?
A deed without a name.
I conjure you by that which you profess— Howe’er you come to know it—answer me. Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches, though the yeasty waves Confound and swallow navigation up, Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down, Though castles topple on their warders’ heads, Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure Of nature’s germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken, answer me To what I ask you.
Speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Demand.
We’ll answer.
Say, if th’ hadst rather hear it from our mouths,Or from our masters’.
Call ‘em. Let me see ‘em.
Pour in sow’s blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten From the murderer’s gibbet throw Into the flame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!
Tell me, thou unknown power—
He knows thy thought.Hear his speech but say thou nought.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff.Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.
Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word more—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He will not be commanded. Here’s anotherMore potent than the first.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!—
Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn The power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.
Then live, Macduff. What need I fear of thee? But yet I’ll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live, That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?
Listen but speak not to ’t.
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are. Macbeth shall never vanquished be until Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill Shall come against him.
That will never be. Who can impress the forest, bid the tree Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements! Good! Rebellious dead, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo’s issue ever Reign in this kingdom?
Seek to know no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will be satisfied. Deny me this, And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?
Show.
Show.
Show.
Show his eyes and grieve his heart.Come like shadows; so depart!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down! Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair, Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. A third is like the former. —Filthy hags! Why do you show me this? A fourth? Start, eyes! What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom? Another yet? A seventh? I’ll see no more. And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more, and some I see That twofold balls and treble scepters carry. Horrible sight! Now I see ’tis true; For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me And points at them for his.
What, is this so?
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights. I’ll charm th’ air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round. That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour Stand aye accursèd in the calendar! Come in, without there.
What’s your grace’s will?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw you the weird sisters?
No, my lord.
Came they not by you?
No, indeed, my lord.
Infected be the air whereon they ride,And damned all those that trust them! I did hear The galloping of horse. Who was ’t came by?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you wordMacduff is fled to England.
Fled to England?
Ay, my good lord.
Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits. The flighty purpose never is o’ertook Unless the deed go with it. From this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise, Seize upon Fife, give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool. This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool. But no more sights! —Where are these gentlemen? Come, bring me where they are.
What had he done to make him fly the land?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You must have patience, madam.
He had none.His flight was madness. When our actions do not,Our fears do make us traitors.
You know not Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
Wisdom! To leave his wife, to leave his babes, His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly? He loves us not; He wants the natural touch. For the poor wren, The most diminutive of birds, will fight, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love, As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.
My dearest coz, I pray you school yourself. But for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o’ th’ season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times when we are traitors And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and none. I take my leave of you. Shall not be long but I’ll be here again. Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.—My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fathered he is, and yet he’s fatherless.
I am so much a fool, should I stay longerIt would be my disgrace and your discomfort. I take my leave at once.
Sirrah, your father’s dead.And what will you do now? How will you live?
As birds do, Mother.
What, with worms and flies?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With what I get, I mean, and so do they.
Poor bird! Thou ’dst never fear the net nor lime,The pitfall nor the gin.
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.My father is not dead, for all your saying.
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?
Nay, how will you do for a husband?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
Then you’ll buy ‘em to sell again.
Thou speak’st with all thy wit; and yet, i’ faith,With wit enough for thee.
Was my father a traitor, Mother?
Ay, that he was.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is a traitor?
Why, one that swears and lies.
And be all traitors that do so?
Every one that does so is a traitor and must be hanged.
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Every one.
Who must hang them?
Why, the honest men.
Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest men and hang up them.
Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do for a father?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he were dead, you’d weep for him. If you would not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.
Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!
Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known, Though in your state of honor I am perfect. I doubt some danger does approach you nearly. If you will take a homely man’s advice, Be not found here. Hence with your little ones. To fright you thus methinks I am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you! I dare abide no longer.
Whither should I fly? I have done no harm. But I remember now I am in this earthly world, where to do harm Is often laudable, to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas, Do I put up that womanly defense, To say I have done no harm?
What are these faces?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is your husband?
I hope, in no place so unsanctifiedWhere such as thou mayst find him.
He’s a traitor.
Thou liest, thou shag-ear’d villain!
[stabbing him] What, you egg?Young fry of treachery!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He has killed me, mother.Run away, I pray you!
Let us seek out some desolate shade and thereWeep our sad bosoms empty.
Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men, Bestride our downfall’n birthdom. Each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yelled out Like syllable of dolor.
What I believe I’ll wail; What know believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will. What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest. You have loved him well. He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but something You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb T’ appease an angry god.
I am not treacherous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But Macbeth is. A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon. That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.
I have lost my hopes.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonors, But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just, Whatever I shall think.
Bleed, bleed, poor country! Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeered.—Fare thee well, lord. I would not be the villain that thou think’st For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp, And the rich East to boot.
Be not offended. I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke. It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds. I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands. But, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What should he be?
It is myself I mean, in whom I know All the particulars of vice so grafted That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state Esteem him as a lamb, being compared With my confineless harms.
Not in the legionsOf horrid hell can come a devil more damnedIn evils to top Macbeth.
I grant him bloody, Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin That has a name. But there’s no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters, Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o’erbear That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.
Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny. It hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours. You may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty And yet seem cold; the time you may so hoodwink. We have willing dames enough. There cannot be That vulture in you to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other’s house. And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more, that I should forge Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, Destroying them for wealth.
This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will, Of your mere own. All these are portable, With other graces weighed.
But I have none. The king-becoming graces, As justice, verity, temperance, stableness, Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness, Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, I have no relish of them but abound In the division of each several crime, Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.
O Scotland, Scotland!
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.I am as I have spoken.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fit to govern? No, not to live. —O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? —Thy royal father Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived. Fare thee well! These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself Have banished me from Scotland. —O my breast, Thy hope ends here!
Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From overcredulous haste. But God above Deal between thee and me, for even now I put myself to thy direction and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow, and delight No less in truth than life. My first false speaking Was this upon myself. What I am truly, Is thine and my poor country’s to command. Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once‘Tis hard to reconcile.
Well, more anon.—Comes the king forth, I pray you?
Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure. Their malady convinces The great assay of art, but at his touch— Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand— They presently amend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you, doctor.
What’s the disease he means?
‘Tis called the evil. A most miraculous work in this good king, Which often since my here-remain in England I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows, but strangely visited people, All swoll’n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers. And, ’tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.
See, who comes here?
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
I know him now.—Good God, betimes remove The means that makes us strangers!
Sir, amen.
Stands Scotland where it did?
Alas, poor country! Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell Is there scarce asked for who, and good men’s lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, relationToo nice and yet too true!
What’s the newest grief?
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker.Each minute teems a new one.
How does my wife?
Why, well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And all my children?
Well too.
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?
No, they were well at peace when I did leave ‘em.
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor Of many worthy fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witnessed the rather For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot. Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.
Be ’t their comfort We are coming thither. Gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.
Would I could answer This comfort with the like. But I have words That would be howled out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.
What concern they?The general cause, or is it a fee-griefDue to some single breast?
No mind that’s honest But in it shares some woe, though the main partPertains to you alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it be mine,Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever, Which shall possess them with the heaviest soundThat ever yet they heard.
Hum! I guess at it.
Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murdered deer To add the death of you.
Merciful heaven! What, man! Ne’er pull your hat upon your brows. Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak Whispers the o’erfraught heart and bids it break.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My children too?
Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.
And I must be from thence!My wife killed too?
I have said.
Be comforted. Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge,To cure this deadly grief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He has no children. All my pretty ones? Did you say all? O hell-kite! All? What, all my pretty chickens and their dam At one fell swoop?
Dispute it like a man.
I shall do so, But I must also feel it as a man. I cannot but remember such things were That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on, And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am, Not for their own demerits, but for mine, Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let griefConvert to anger. Blunt not the heart, enrage it.
Oh, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens, Cut short all intermission. Front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself. Within my sword’s length set him; if he ’scape, Heaven forgive him too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This tune goes manly. Come, go we to the king. Our power is ready; Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may. The night is long that never finds the day.
I have two nights watched with you but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen herrise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlockher closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon ’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once thebenefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching. In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?
That, sir, which I will not report after her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may to me, and ’tis most meet you should.
Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.
Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her, stand close.
How came she by that light?
Why, it stood by her. She has light by her continually.‘Tis her command.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You see her eyes are open.
Ay, but their sense is shut.
What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.
It is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands. I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.
Yet here’s a spot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark! She speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
Out, damned spot! Out, I say! —One, two. Why, then, ’tis time to do ’t. Hell is murky! —Fie, my lord, fie! A soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?— Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.
Do you mark that?
The thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?—What, will these hands ne’er be clean?—No more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that. You mar all with this starting.
Go to, go to. You have known what you should not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has known.
Here’s the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, Oh, Oh!
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
Well, well, well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray God it be, sir.
This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.
Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown. Look not so pale.—I tell you yet again, Banquo’s buried; he cannot come out on ’s grave.
Even so?
To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come. Give me your hand. What’s done cannot be undone.—To bed, to bed, to bed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will she go now to bed?
Directly.
Foul whisp’rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. More needs she the divine than the physician. God, God forgive us all! Look after her, Remove from her the means of all annoyance, And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night. My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. I think, but dare not speak.
Good night, good doctor.
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff. Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Near Birnam WoodShall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file Of all the gentry. There is Siward’s son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.
What does the tyrant?
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies. Some say he’s mad, others that lesser hate him Do call it valiant fury. But, for certain, He cannot buckle his distempered cause Within the belt of rule.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands. Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach. Those he commands move only in command, Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe Upon a dwarfish thief.
Who then shall blame His pestered senses to recoil and start, When all that is within him does condemn Itself for being there?
Well, march we on, To give obedience where ’tis truly owed. Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country’s purge Each drop of us.
Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.Make we our march towards Birnam.
Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all. Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm? Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: “Fear not, Macbeth. No man that’s born of woman Shall e’er have power upon thee.” Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures. The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!Where got’st thou that goose look?
There is ten thousand—
Geese, villain?
Soldiers, sir.
Go, prick thy face and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch? Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The English force, so please you.
Take thy face hence.
Seyton!—I am sick at heart, When I behold—Seyton, I say!— This push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. I have lived long enough. My way of life Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf, And that which should accompany old age, As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends, I must not look to have, but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not. Seyton!
What’s your gracious pleasure?
What news more?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked.Give me my armor.
‘Tis not needed yet.
I’ll put it on. Send out more horses. Skirr the country round. Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armor. How does your patient, doctor?
Not so sick, my lord, As she is troubled with thick-coming fanciesThat keep her from her rest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?
Therein the patientMust minister to himself.
Throw physic to the dogs; I’ll none of it. Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff. Seyton, send out.— Doctor, the thanes fly from me. Come, sir, dispatch.— If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.— Pull ’t off, I say.— What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of them?
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation Makes us hear something.
Bring it after me.I will not be afraid of death and bane,Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](aside) Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,Profit again should hardly draw me here.
Cousins, I hope the days are near at handThat chambers will be safe.
We doubt it nothing.
What wood is this before us?
The wood of Birnam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let every soldier hew him down a bough And bear ’t before him. Thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.
It shall be done.
We learn no other but the confident tyrantKeeps still in Dunsinane and will endure Our setting down before ’t.
‘Tis his main hope: For, where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrainèd things Whose hearts are absent too.
Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we onIndustrious soldiership.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe. Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate. Towards which, advance the war.
Hang out our banners on the outward walls. The cry is still “They come!” Our castle’s strength Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up. Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.
What is that noise?
It is the cry of women, my good lord.
I have almost forgot the taste of fears. The time has been my senses would have cooled To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in ’t. I have supped full with horrors. Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore was that cry?
The queen, my lord, is dead.
She should have died hereafter. There would have been a time for such a word. Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle! Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player That struts and frets his hour upon the stage And then is heard no more. It is a tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.
Thou comest to useThy tongue; thy story quickly.
Gracious my lord, I should report that which I say I saw,But know not how to do ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, say, sir.
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,I looked toward Birnam, and anon methoughtThe wood began to move.
Liar and slave!
Let me endure your wrath, if ’t be not so.Within this three mile may you see it coming;I say, a moving grove.
If thou speak’st false, Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth, I care not if thou dost for me as much. I pull in resolution and begin To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth. “Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane”; and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane. —Arm, arm, and out!— If this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. I ‘gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now undone.— Ring the alarum-bell!—Blow, wind! Come, wrack! At least we’ll die with harness on our back.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down, And show like those you are.— You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon ’s what else remains to do, According to our order.
Fare you well.Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight,Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly, But, bearlike, I must fight the course. What’s he That was not born of woman? Such a one Am I to fear, or none.
What is thy name?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou ‘lt be afraid to hear it.
No, though thou call’st thyself a hotter nameThan any is in hell.
My name’s Macbeth.
The devil himself could not pronounce a titleMore hateful to mine ear.
No, nor more fearful.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou liest, abhorrèd tyrant. With my swordI’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.
Thou wast born of woman.But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandished by man that’s of a woman born.
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face! If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbattered edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of the greatest note Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune, And more I beg not.
This way, my lord. The castle’s gently rendered. The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight, The noble thanes do bravely in the war, The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.
We have met with foesThat strike beside us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Enter, sir, the castle.
Why should I play the Roman fool and dieOn mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashesDo better upon them.
Turn, hellhound, turn!
Of all men else I have avoided thee. But get thee back. My soul is too much chargedWith blood of thine already.
I have no words.My voice is in my sword. Thou bloodier villainThan terms can give thee out!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou losest labor. As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed. Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield To one of woman born.
Despair thy charm, And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother’s womb Untimely ripped.
Accursèd be that tongue that tells me so, For it hath cowed my better part of man! And be these juggling fiends no more believed, That palter with us in a double sense, That keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope. I’ll not fight with thee.
Then yield thee, coward, And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time. We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are, Painted on a pole, and underwrit, “Here may you see the tyrant.”
I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet, And to be baited with the rabble’s curse. Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damned be him that first cries, “Hold, enough!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
Some must go off. And yet, by these I see,So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt. He only lived but till he was a man, The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.
Then he is dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for thenIt hath no end.
Had he his hurts before?
Ay, on the front.
Why then, God’s soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death. And so, his knell is knolled.
He’s worth more sorrow,And that I’ll spend for him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’s worth no more.They say he parted well and paid his score.And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.
Hail, king! For so thou art. Behold where stands The usurper’s cursèd head. The time is free. I see thee compassed with thy kingdom’s pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds, Whose voices I desire aloud with mine. Hail, King of Scotland!
Hail, King of Scotland!
We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honor named. What’s more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny, Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiendlike queen, Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time, and place. So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.
Escalus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord.
Of government the properties to unfold, Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse; Since I am put to know that your own science Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice My strength can give you: then no more remains, But that to your sufficiency as your Worth is able, And let them work. The nature of our people, Our city's institutions, and the terms For common justice, you're as pregnant in As art and practise hath enriched any That we remember. There is our commission, From which we would not have you warp. Call hither, I say, bid come before us Angelo.
What figure of us think you he will bear? For you must know, we have with special soul Elected him our absence to supply, Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love, And given his deputation all the organs Of our own power: what think you of it?
If any in Vienna be of worthTo undergo such ample grace and honour,It is Lord Angelo.
Look where he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Always obedient to your grace's will,I come to know your pleasure.
Angelo, There is a kind of character in thy life, That to the observer doth thy history Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings Are not thine own so proper as to waste Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee. Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends The smallest scruple of her excellence But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines Herself the glory of a creditor, Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech To one that can my part in him advertise; Hold therefore, Angelo: — In our remove be thou at full ourself; Mortality and mercy in Vienna Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus, Though first in question, is thy secondary. Take thy commission.
Now, good my lord,Let there be some more test made of my metal,Before so noble and so great a figureBe stamp'd upon it.
No more evasion: We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours. Our haste from hence is of so quick condition That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd Matters of needful value. We shall write to you, As time and our concernings shall importune, How it goes with us, and do look to know What doth befall you here. So, fare you well; To the hopeful execution do I leave you Of your commissions.
Yet give leave, my lord,That we may bring you something on the way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My haste may not admit it; Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do With any scruple; your scope is as mine own So to enforce or qualify the laws As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand: I'll privily away. I love the people, But do not like to stage me to their eyes: Though it do well, I do not relish well Their loud applause and Aves vehement; Nor do I think the man of safe discretion That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.
The heavens give safety to your purposes!
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
I thank you. Fare you well.
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave To have free speech with you; and it concerns me To look into the bottom of my place: A power I have, but of what strength and nature I am not yet instructed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,And we may soon our satisfaction haveTouching that point.
I'll wait upon your honour.
If the duke with the other dukes come not tocomposition with the King of Hungary, why then allthe dukes fall upon the king.
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King ofHungary's!
Amen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, thatwent to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scrapedone out of the table.
"Thou shalt not steal?"
Ay, that he razed.
Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal. There's not a soldier of us all, that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.
I never heard any soldier dislike it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I believe thee; for I think thou never wast wheregrace was said.
No? a dozen times at least.
What, in metre?
In any proportion or in any language.
I think, or in any religion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of allcontroversy: as, for example, thou thyself art awicked villain, despite of all grace.
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
I grant; as there may between the lists and thevelvet. Thou art the list.
And thou the velvet: thou art good velvet; thou'rt a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?
I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.
Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! Ihave purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to—
To what, I pray?
Judge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To three thousand dolours a year.
Ay, and more.
A French crown more.
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thouart full of error; I am sound.
Nay, not as one would say, healthy; but so sound as things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast of thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?
Well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carriedto prison was worth five thousand of you all.
Who's that, I pray thee?
Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.
Claudio to prison? 'tis not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw him carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.Art thou sure of this?
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting MadamJulietta with child.
Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me twohours since, and he was ever precise inpromise-keeping.
Besides, you know, it draws something near to thespeech we had to such a purpose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.
Away! let's go learn the truth of it.
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.
How now! what's the news with you?
Yonder man is carried to prison.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well; what has he done?
A woman.
But what's his offence?
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
What, is there a maid with child by him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, but there's a woman with maid by him. You havenot heard of the proclamation, have you?
What proclamation, man?
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.
And what shall become of those in the city?
They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too,but that a wise burgher put in for them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs bepulled down?
To the ground, mistress.
Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!What shall become of me?
Come; fear you not: good counsellors lack no clients: though you change your place, you need not change your trade; I'll be your tapster still. Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.
What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost toprison; and there's Madam Juliet.
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
I do it not in evil disposition,But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
Thus can the demigod Authority Make us pay down for our offence by weight The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will; On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
Why, how now, Claudio! whence comes this restraint?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty: As surfeit is the father of much fast, So every scope by the immoderate use Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue, Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What's thy offence, Claudio?
What but to speak of would offend again.
What, is't murder?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lechery?
Call it so.
Away, sir! you must go.
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.
A hundred, if they'll do you any good.Is lechery so look'd after?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract I got possession of Julietta's bed: You know the lady; she is fast my wife, Save that we do the denunciation lack Of outward order: this we came not to, Only for propagation of a dower Remaining in the coffer of her friends, From whom we thought it meet to hide our love Till time had made them for us. But it chances The stealth of our most mutual entertainment With character too gross is writ on Juliet.
With child, perhaps?
Unhappily, even so. And the new deputy now for the duke— Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness, Or whether that the body public be A horse whereon the governor doth ride, Who, newly in the seat, that it may know He can command, lets it straight feel the spur; Whether the tyranny be in his place, Or in his emmence that fills it up, I stagger in: —but this new governor Awakes me all the enrolled penalties Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round And none of them been worn; and, for a name, Now puts the drowsy and neglected act Freshly on me: 'tis surely for a name.
I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to him.
I have done so, but he's not to be found. I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service: This day my sister should the cloister enter And there receive her approbation: Acquaint her with the danger of my state: Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him: I have great hope in that; for in her youth There is a prone and speechless dialect, Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art When she will play with reason and discourse, And well she can persuade.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. I'll to her.
I thank you, good friend Lucio.
Within two hours.
Come, officer, away!
No, holy father; throw away that thought; Believe not that the dribbling dart of love Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends Of burning youth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May your grace speak of it?
My holy sir, none better knows than you How I have ever loved the life removed And held in idle price to haunt assemblies Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps. I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo, A man of stricture and firm abstinence, My absolute power and place here in Vienna, And he supposes me travell'd to Poland; For so I have strew'd it in the common ear, And so it is received. Now, pious sir, You will demand of me why I do this?
Gladly, my lord.
We have strict statutes and most biting laws. The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, Which for this nineteen years we have let slip; Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers, Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch, Only to stick it in their children's sight For terror, not to use, in time the rod Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees, Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead; And liberty plucks justice by the nose; The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart Goes all decorum.
It rested in your grace To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased: And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd Than in Lord Angelo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do fear, too dreadful: Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope, 'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done, When evil deeds have their permissive pass And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father, I have on Angelo imposed the office; Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, And yet my nature never in the fight To do in slander. And to behold his sway, I will, as 'twere a brother of your order, Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee, Supply me with the habit and instruct me How I may formally in person bear me Like a true friar. More reasons for this action At our more leisure shall I render you; Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise; Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses That his blood flows, or that his appetite Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see, If power change purpose, what our seemers be.
And have you nuns no farther privileges?
Are not these large enough?
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more; But rather wishing a more strict restraint Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
[Within] Ho! Peace be in this place!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who's that which calls?
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella, Turn you the key, and know his business of him; You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn. When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men But in the presence of the prioress: Then, if you speak, you must not show your face, Or, if you show your face, you must not speak. He calls again; I pray you, answer him.
Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls?
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me As bring me to the sight of Isabella, A novice of this place and the fair sister To her unhappy brother Claudio?
Why "her unhappy brother?" let me ask, The rather for I now must make you know I am that Isabella and his sister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you:Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
Woe me! for what?
For that which, if myself might be his judge,He should receive his punishment in thanks:He hath got his friend with child.
Sir, make me not your story.
It is true. I would not—though 'tis my familiar sin With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, Tongue far from heart—play with all virgins so: I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted. By your renouncement an immortal spirit, And to be talk'd with in sincerity, As with a saint.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus: Your brother and his lover have embraced: As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time That from the seedness the bare fallow brings To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?
Is she your cousin?
Adoptedly; as school-maids change their namesBy vain though apt affection.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She it is.
O, let him marry her.
This is the point. The duke is very strangely gone from hence; Bore many gentlemen, myself being one, In hand and hope of action: but we do learn By those that know the very nerves of state, His givings-out were of an infinite distance From his true-meant design. Upon his place, And with full line of his authority, Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood Is very snow-broth; one who never feels The wanton stings and motions of the sense, But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge With profits of the mind, study and fast. He—to give fear to use and liberty, Which have for long run by the hideous law, As mice by lions—hath pick'd out an act, Under whose heavy sense your brother's life Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it; And follows close the rigour of the statute, To make him an example. All hope is gone, Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business 'Twixt you and your poor brother.
Doth he so seek his life?
Has censured himAlready; and, as I hear, the provost hathA warrant for his execution.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas! what poor ability's in meTo do him good?
Assay the power you have.
My power? Alas, I doubt—
Our doubts are traitors And make us lose the good we oft might win By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo, And let him learn to know, when maidens sue, Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel, All their petitions are as freely theirs As they themselves would owe them.
I'll see what I can do.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But speedily.
I will about it straight; No longer staying but to give the mother Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you: Commend me to my brother: soon at night I'll send him certain word of my success.
I take my leave of you.
Good sir, adieu.
We must not make a scarecrow of the law, Setting it up to fear the birds of prey, And let it keep one shape, till custom make it Their perch and not their terror.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but yet Let us be keen, and rather cut a little, Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman Whom I would save, had a most noble father! Let but your honour know, Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue, That, in the working of your own affections, Had time cohered with place or place with wishing, Or that the resolute acting of your blood Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose, Whether you had not sometime in your life Err'd in this point which now you censure him, And pull'd the law upon you.
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, Another thing to fall. I not deny, The jury, passing on the prisoner's life, May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice, That justice seizes: what know the laws That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant, The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't Because we see it; but what we do not see We tread upon, and never think of it. You may not so extenuate his offence For I have had such faults; but rather tell me, When I, that censure him, do so offend, Let mine own judgment pattern out my death, And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.
Be it as your wisdom will.
Where is the provost?
Here, if it like your honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See that Claudio Be executed by nine to-morrow morning: Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared; For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
[aside] Well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all! Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall: Some run from brakes of ice, and answer none: And some condemned for a fault alone.
Come, bring them away: if these be good people in a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law: bring them away.
How now, sir! What's your name? and what's the matter?
If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke's constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Benefactors? Well; what benefactors are they? arethey not malefactors?
If it please your honour, I know not well what they are: but precise villains they are, that I am sure of; and void of all profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.
This comes off well; here's a wise officer.
Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is yourname? why dost thou not speak, Elbow?
He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What are you, sir?
He, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.
How know you that?
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,—
How? thy wife?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,—
Dost thou detest her therefore?
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.
How dost thou know that, constable?
Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the woman's means?
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as shespit in his face, so she defied him.
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourableman; prove it.
Do you hear how he misplaces?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, a dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes,—
Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the right: but to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said, Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could not give you three-pence again.
No, indeed.
Very well: you being then, if you be remembered,cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, so I did indeed.
Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you,—
All this is true.
Why, very well, then,—
Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
No, sir, nor I mean it not.
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave. And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?
All-hallond eve.
Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.
Why, very well, then; I hope here be truths.
This will last out a night in Russia, When nights are longest there: I'll take my leave. And leave you to the hearing of the cause; Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
I beseech your honour, ask me.
Well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir, very well.
Nay; I beseech you, mark it well.
Well, I do so.
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?
Why, no.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him. Good, then; if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would know that of your honour.
He's in the right. Constable, what say you to it?
First, an it like you, the house is a respectedhouse; next, this is a respected fellow; and hismistress is a respected woman.
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respectedperson than any of us all.
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! thetime has yet to come that she was ever respectedwith man, woman, or child.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Isthis true?
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married to her! If ever I was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or I'll have mine action of battery on thee.
If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have youraction of slander too.
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is'tyour worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are.
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.
Where were you born, friend?
Here in Vienna, sir.
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, an't please you, sir.
So. What trade are you of, sir?
Tapster; a poor widow's tapster.
Your mistress' name?
Mistress Overdone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hath she had any more than one husband?
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I nevercome into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawnin.
Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What's yourname, Master tapster?
Pompey.
What else?
Bum, sir.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? Whatdo you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?
If the law would allow it, sir.
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shallnot be allowed in Vienna.
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all theyouth of the city?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, Pompey.
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. If your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:it is but heading and hanging.
If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more heads: if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest house in it after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this come to pass, say Pompey told you so.
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank your worship for your good counsel. [aside] butI shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine. Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade: The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.
Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Masterconstable. How long have you been in this place of constable?
Seven year and a half, sir.
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you hadcontinued in it some time. You say, seven years together?
And a half, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you wrong to put you so oft upon 't: are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go through with all.
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,the most sufficient of your parish.
To your worship's house, sir?
To my house. Fare you well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's o'clock, think you?
Eleven, sir.
I pray you home to dinner with me.
I humbly thank you.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio;But there's no remedy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lord Angelo is severe.
It is but needful: Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so; Pardon is still the nurse of second woe: But yet,—poor Claudio! There is no remedy. Come, sir.
He's hearing of a cause; he will come straightI'll tell him of you.
Pray you, do.
I'll know His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas, He hath but as offended in a dream! All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he To die for't!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, what's the matter. Provost?
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?Why dost thou ask again?
Lest I might be too rash: Under your good correction, I have seen, When, after execution, judgment hath Repented o'er his doom.
Go to; let that be mine: Do you your office, or give up your place, And you shall well be spared.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I crave your honour's pardon.What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?She's very near her hour.
Dispose of herTo some more fitter place, and that with speed.
Here is the sister of the man condemn'dDesires access to you.
Hath he a sister?
Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid, And to be shortly of a sisterhood, If not already.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, let her be admitted.
See you the fornicatress be removed: Let have needful, but not lavish, means; There shall be order for't.
God save your honour!
Stay a little while. [to ISABELLA] You're welcome: what's your will?
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,Please but your honour hear me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well; what's your suit?
There is a vice that most I do abhor, And most desire should meet the blow of justice; For which I would not plead, but that I must; For which I must not plead, but that I am At war 'twixt will and will not.
Well; the matter?
I have a brother is condemn'd to die:I do beseech you, let it be his fault,And not my brother.
[a side] Heaven give thee moving graces!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Condemn the fault and not the actor of it? Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done: Mine were the very cipher of a function, To fine the faults whose fine stands in record, And let go by the actor.
O just but severe law!I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
[aside to ISABELLA] Give't not o'er so: to him again, entreat him; Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown: You are too cold; if you should need a pin, You could not with more tame a tongue desire it: To him, I say!
Must he needs die?
Maiden, no remedy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
I will not do't.
But can you, if you would?
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,If so your heart were touch'd with that remorseAs mine is to him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's sentenced; 'tis too late.
[aside to ISABELLA] You are too cold.
Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word. May call it back again. Well, believe this, No ceremony that to great ones 'longs, Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword, The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, Become them with one half so good a grace As mercy does. If he had been as you and you as he, You would have slipt like him; but he, like you, Would not have been so stern.
Pray you, be gone.
I would to heaven I had your potency, And you were Isabel! should it then be thus? No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge, And what a prisoner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,And you but waste your words.
Alas, alas! Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once; And He that might the vantage best have took Found out the remedy. How would you be, If He, which is the top of judgment, should But judge you as you are? O, think on that; And mercy then will breathe within your lips, Like man new made.
Be you content, fair maid; It is the law, not I condemn your brother: Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son, It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.
To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him! He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven With less respect than we do minister To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you; Who is it that hath died for this offence? There's many have committed it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to ISABELLA] Ay, well said.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept: Those many had not dared to do that evil, If the first that did the edict infringe Had answer'd for his deed: now 'tis awake Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet, Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils, Either new, or by remissness new-conceived, And so in progress to be hatch'd and born, Are now to have no successive degrees, But, ere they live, to end.
Yet show some pity.
I show it most of all when I show justice; For then I pity those I do not know, Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall; And do him right that, answering one foul wrong, Lives not to act another. Be satisfied; Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence, And he, that suffer's. O, it is excellent To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous To use it like a giant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to ISABELLA] That's well said.
Could great men thunder As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet, For every pelting, petty officer Would use his heaven for thunder; Nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven, Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man, Drest in a little brief authority, Most ignorant of what he's most assured, His glassy essence, like an angry ape, Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens, Would all themselves laugh mortal.
[aside to ISABELLA] O, to him, to him, wench! hewill relent;He's coming; I perceive 't.
[aside] Pray heaven she win him!
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,But in the less foul profanation.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.
That in the captain's but a choleric word,Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
[aside to ISABELLA] Art avised o' that? more on 't.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?
Because authority, though it err like others, Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom; Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know That's like my brother's fault: if it confess A natural guiltiness such as is his, Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue Against my brother's life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] She speaks, and 'tis Such sense, that my sense breeds with it. Fare you well.
Gentle my lord, turn back.
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.
Hark how I'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.
How! bribe me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
[aside to ISABELLA] You had marr'd all else.
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold, Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor As fancy values them; but with true prayers That shall be up at heaven and enter there Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls, From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate To nothing temporal.
Well; come to me to-morrow.
[aside to ISABELLA] Go to; 'tis well; away!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heaven keep your honour safe!
[aside] Amen:For I am that way going to temptation,Where prayers cross.
At what hour to-morrowShall I attend your lordship?
At any time 'fore noon.
'Save your honour!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From thee, even from thy virtue! What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine? The tempter or the tempted, who sins most? Ha! Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I That, lying by the violet in the sun, Do as the carrion does, not as the flower, Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be That modesty may more betray our sense Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough, Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie! What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo? Dost thou desire her foully for those things That make her good? O, let her brother live! Thieves for their robbery have authority When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her, That I desire to hear her speak again, And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on? O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint, With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous Is that temptation that doth goad us on To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet, With all her double vigour, art and nature, Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid Subdues me quite. Even till now, When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.
I am the provost. What's your will, good friar?
Bound by my charity and my blest order, I come to visit the afflicted spirits Here in the prison. Do me the common right To let me see them and to make me know The nature of their crimes, that I may minister To them accordingly.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine, Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, Hath blister'd her report: she is with child; And he that got it, sentenced; a young man More fit to do another such offence Than die for this.
When must he die?
As I do think, to-morrow.I have provided for you: stay awhile, [To JULIET] And you shall be conducted.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, And try your penitence, if it be sound, Or hollowly put on.
I'll gladly learn.
Love you the man that wrong'd you?
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
So then it seems your most offenceful actWas mutually committed?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
'Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent, As that the sin hath brought you to this shame, Which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven, Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it, But as we stand in fear,—
I do repent me, as it is an evil,And take the shame with joy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There rest. Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow, And I am going with instruction to him. Grace go with you, Benedicite!
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love, That respites me a life, whose very comfort Is still a dying horror!
'Tis pity of him.
When I would pray and think, I think and pray To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words; Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue, Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth, As if I did but only chew his name; And in my heart the strong and swelling evil Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied Is like a good thing, being often read, Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity, Wherein—let no man hear me—I take pride, Could I with boot change for an idle plume, Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form, How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit, Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood: Let's write good angel on the devil's horn: 'Tis not the devil's crest.
How now! who's there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
Teach her the way.
O heavens! Why does my blood thus muster to my heart, Making both it unable for itself, And dispossessing all my other parts Of necessary fitness? So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons; Come all to help him, and so stop the air By which he should revive: and even so The general, subject to a well-wish'd king, Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love Must needs appear offence.
How now, fair maid?
I am come to know your pleasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That you might know it, would much better please meThan to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!
Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be,As long as you or I; yet he must die.
Under your sentence?
Yea.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,Longer or shorter, he may be so fittedThat his soul sicken not.
Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good To pardon him that hath from nature stolen A man already made, as to remit Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image In stamps that are forbid: 'tis all as easy Falsely to take away a life true made As to put metal in restrained means To make a false one.
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly. Which had you rather, that the most just law Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him, Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness As she that he hath stain'd?
Sir, believe this,I had rather give my body than my soul.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sinsStand more for number than for accompt.
How say you?
Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak Against the thing I say. Answer to this: I, now the voice of the recorded law, Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life: Might there not be a charity in sin To save this brother's life?
Please you to do't,I'll take it as a peril to my soul,It is no sin at all, but charity.
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,Were equal poise of sin and charity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I do beg his life, if it be sin, Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit, If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer To have it added to the faults of mine, And nothing of your answer.
Nay, but hear me.Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,Or seem so craftily; and that's not good.
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,But graciously to know I am no better.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright When it doth tax itself; as these black masks Proclaim and enshield beauty ten times louder Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me; To be received plain, I'll speak more gross: Your brother is to die.
So.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And his offence is so, as it appears,Accountant to the law upon that pain.
True.
Admit no other way to save his life,— As I subscribe not that, nor any other, But in the loss of question, —that you, his sister, Finding yourself desired of such a person, Whose credit with the judge, or own great place, Could fetch your brother from the manacles Of the all-building law; and that there were No earthly mean to save him, but that either You must lay down the treasures of your body To this supposed, or else to let him suffer; What would you do?
As much for my poor brother as myself: That is, were I under the terms of death, The impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies, And strip myself to death, as to a bed That longing have been sick for, ere I'ld yield My body up to shame.
Then must your brother die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And 'twere the cheaper way: Better it were a brother died at once, Than that a sister, by redeeming him, Should die for ever.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentenceThat you have slander'd so?
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon Are of two houses: lawful mercy Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;And rather proved the sliding of your brotherA merriment than a vice.
O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out, To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean: I something do excuse the thing I hate, For his advantage that I dearly love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are all frail.
Else let my brother die,If not a feodary, but only heOwe and succeed thy weakness.
Nay, women are frail too.
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves; Which are as easy broke as they make forms. Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail; For we are soft as our complexions are, And credulous to false prints.
I think it well: And from this testimony of your own sex, — Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger Than faults may shake our frames, —let me be bold; I do arrest your words. Be that you are, That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none; If you be one, as you are well express'd By all external warrants, show it now, By putting on the destined livery.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord,Let me entreat you speak the former language.
Plainly conceive, I love you.
My brother did love Juliet,And you tell me that he shall die for it.
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
I know your virtue hath a licence in't,Which seems a little fouler than it is,To pluck on others.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Believe me, on mine honour,My words express my purpose.
Ha! little honour to be much believed, And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming! I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for't: Sign me a present pardon for my brother, Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud What man thou art.
Who will believe thee, Isabel? My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life, My vouch against you, and my place i' the state, Will so your accusation overweigh, That you shall stifle in your own report And smell of calumny. I have begun, And now I give my sensual race the rein: Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite; Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes, That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother By yielding up thy body to my will; Or else he must not only die the death, But thy unkindness shall his death draw out To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow, Or, by the affection that now guides me most, I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you, Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this, Who would believe me? O perilous mouths, That bear in them one and the self-same tongue, Either of condemnation or approof; Bidding the law make court'sy to their will: Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite, To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother: Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood, Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour. That, had he twenty heads to tender down On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up, Before his sister should her body stoop To such abhorr'd pollution. Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die: More than our brother is our chastity. I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request, And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The miserable have no other medicineBut only hope:I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.
Be absolute for death; either death or life Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life: If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art, Servile to all the skyey influences, That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st, Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool; For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble; For all the accommodations that thou bear'st Are nursed by baseness. Thou'rt by no means valiant; For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep, And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear'st Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself; For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not; For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get, And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain; For thy complexion shifts to strange effects, After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor; For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey, And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none; For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, The mere effusion of thy proper loins, Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age, But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep, Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich, Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this That bears the name of life? Yet in this life Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear, That makes these odds all even.
I humbly thank you.To sue to live, I find I seek to die;And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.
[Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
Who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
Most holy sir, I thank you.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
Provost, a word with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As many as you please.
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.
Now, sister, what's the comfort?
Why, As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed. Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven, Intends you for his swift ambassador, Where you shall be an everlasting leiger: Therefore your best appointment make with speed; To-morrow you set on.
Is there no remedy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None, but such remedy as, to save a head,To cleave a heart in twain.
But is there any?
Yes, brother, you may live: There is a devilish mercy in the judge, If you'll implore it, that will free your life, But fetter you till death.
Perpetual durance?
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint, Though all the world's vastidity you had, To a determined scope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But in what nature?
In such a one as, you consenting to't,Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,And leave you naked.
Let me know the point.
O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake, Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain, And six or seven winters more respect Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die? The sense of death is most in apprehension; And the poor beetle, that we tread upon, In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great As when a giant dies.
Why give you me this shame? Think you I can a resolution fetch From flowery tenderness? If I must die, I will encounter darkness as a bride, And hug it in mine arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There spake my brother; there my father's grave Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die: Thou art too noble to conserve a life In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy, Whose settled visage and deliberate word Nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil His filth within being cast, he would appear A pond as deep as hell.
The prenzie Angelo!
O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell, The damned'st body to invest and cover In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio? If I would yield him my virginity, Thou mightst be freed.
O heavens! it cannot be.
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence, So to offend him still. This night's the time That I should do what I abhor to name, Or else thou diest to-morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou shalt not do't.
O, were it but my life,I'ld throw it down for your deliveranceAs frankly as a pin.
Thanks, dear Isabel.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.
Yes. Has he affections in him, That thus can make him bite the law by the nose, When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin, Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which is the least?
If it were damnable, he being so wise,Why would he for the momentary trickBe perdurably fined? O Isabel!
What says my brother?
Death is a fearful thing.
And shamed life a hateful.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but to die, and go we know not where; To lie in cold obstruction and to rot; This sensible warm motion to become A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice; To be imprison'd in the viewless winds, And blown with restless violence round about The pendent world; or to be worse than worst Of those that lawless and incertain thought Imagine howling: 'tis too horrible! The weariest and most loathed worldly life That age, ache, penury and imprisonment Can lay on nature is a paradise To what we fear of death.
Alas, alas!
Sweet sister, let me live: What sin you do to save a brother's life, Nature dispenses with the deed so far That it becomes a virtue.
O you beast! O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch! Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice? Is't not a kind of incest, to take life From thine own sister's shame? What should I think? Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair! For such a warped slip of wilderness Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance! Die, perish! Might but my bending down Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed: I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death, No word to save thee.
Nay, hear me, Isabel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, fie, fie, fie! Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade. Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd: 'Tis best thou diest quickly.
O hear me, Isabella!
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
What is your will?
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I would require is likewise your own benefit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must bestolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her, hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to your knees and make ready.
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of lovewith life that I will sue to be rid of it.
Hold you there: farewell.
Provost, a word with you!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's your will, father?
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
In good time.
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good: the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke deceived in Angelo! I f ever he return and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings: to the love I have in doing good a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to doanything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Haveyou not heard speak of Mariana, the sister ofFrederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.
She should this Angelo have married; was affianced to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between which time of the contract and limit of the solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maidfrom the world! What corruption in this life, thatit will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and thecure of it not only saves your brother, but keepsyou from dishonour in doing it.
Show me how, good father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to the point; only refer yourself to this advantage, first, that your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience. This being granted in course,—and now follows all,—we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What think you of it?
The image of it gives me content already; and Itrust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be quickly.
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you willneeds buy and sell men and women like beasts, weshall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O heavens! what stuff is here?
'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.
Come your way, sir. 'Bless you, good father friar.
And you, good brother father. What offence haththis man made you, sir?
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd! The evil that thou causest to be done, That is thy means to live. Do thou but think What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back From such a filthy vice: say to thyself, From their abominable and beastly touches I drink, I eat, array myself, and live. Canst thou believe thy living is a life, So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet,sir, I would prove—
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer: Correction and instruction must both work Ere this rude beast will profit.
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
That we were all, as some would seem to be,From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His neck will come to your waist,—a cord, sir.
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman and afriend of mine.
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Is't not drowned i' the last rain, ha? What sayest thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The trick of it?
Still thus, and thus; still worse!
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures shestill, ha?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and sheis herself in the tub.
Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd: an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?
Yes, faith, sir.
Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say Isent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity too; bawd-born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison, Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you will keep the house.
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 'Bless you, friar.
And you.
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come your ways, sir; come.
You will not bail me, then, sir?
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?what news?
Come your ways, sir; come.
Go to kennel, Pompey; go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What news, friar, of the duke?
I know none. Can you tell me of any?
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; othersome, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?
I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to 't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He does well in 't.
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm inhim: something too crabbed that way, friar.
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and woman after this downright way of creation: is it true, think you?
How should he be made, then?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice; that I know to be true: and he is a motion generative; that's infallible.
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the duke that is absent have done this? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
I never heard the absent duke much detected forwomen; he was not inclined that way.
O, sir, you are deceived.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis not possible.
Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
You do him wrong, surely.
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was theduke: and I believe I know the cause of hiswithdrawing.
What, I prithee, might be the cause?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips: but this I can let you understand, the greater file of the subject held the duke to be wise.
Wise! why, no question but he was.
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking: the very stream of his life and the business he hath helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier. Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.
Sir, I know him, and I love him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge withdearer love.
Come, sir, I know what I know.
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call upon you; and, I pray you, your name?
Sir, my name is Lucio; well known to the duke.
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live toreport you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I fear you not.
O, you hope the duke will return no more; or youimagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed Ican do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.
I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me,friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell ifClaudio die to-morrow or no?
Why should he die, sir?
Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would the duke we talk of were returned again: the ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to light: would he were returned! Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing. Farewell, good friar: I prithee, pray for me. The duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not past it yet, and I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown bread and garlic: say that I said so. Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No might nor greatness in mortality Can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue? But who comes here?
Go; away with her to prison!
Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounteda merciful man; good my lord.
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit inthe same kind! This would make mercy swear and playthe tyrant.
A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it pleaseyour honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me. Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the duke's time; he promised her marriage: his child is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob: I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him becalled before us. Away with her to prison! Go to;no more words.
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered; Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
So please you, this friar hath been with him, andadvised him for the entertainment of death.
Good even, good father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bliss and goodness on you!
Of whence are you?
Not of this country, though my chance is now To use it for my time: I am a brother Of gracious order, late come from the See In special business from his holiness.
What news abroad i' the world?
None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it: novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous to be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough to make fellowships accurst: much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One that, above all other strifes, contendedespecially to know himself.
What pleasure was he given to?
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared. I am made to understand that you have lent him visitation.
He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice: yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which I by my good leisure have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.
You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If his own life answer the straitness of hisproceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if hechance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
Peace be with you!
He who the sword of heaven will bear Should be as holy as severe; Pattern in himself to know, Grace to stand, and virtue go; More nor less to others paying Than by self-offences weighing. Shame to him whose cruel striking Kills for faults of his own liking! Twice treble shame on Angelo, To weed my vice and let his grow! O, what may man within him hide, Though angel on the outward side! How may likeness made in crimes, Making practise on the times, To draw with idle spiders' strings Most ponderous and substantial things! Craft against vice I must apply: With Angelo to-night shall lie His old betrothed but despised; So disguise shall, by the disguised, Pay with falsehood false exacting, And perform an old contracting.
Take, O, take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworn; And those eyes, the break of day, Lights that do mislead the morn: But my kisses bring again, bring again; Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away: Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, sir; and well could wish You had not found me here so musical: Let me excuse me, and believe me so, My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm To make bad good, and good provoke to harm. I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired for me here to-day? much upon this time have I promised here to meet.
You have not been inquired after:I have sat here all day.
I do constantly believe you. The time is come evennow. I shall crave your forbearance a little: maybe I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am always bound to you.
Very well met, and well come.What is the news from this good deputy?
He hath a garden circummured with brick, Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd; And to that vineyard is a planched gate, That makes his opening with this bigger key: This other doth command a little door Which from the vineyard to the garden leads; There have I made my promise Upon the heavy middle of the night To call upon him.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't: With whispering and most guilty diligence, In action all of precept, he did show me The way twice o'er.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are there no other tokensBetween you 'greed concerning her observance?
No, none, but only a repair i' the dark; And that I have possess'd him my most stay Can be but brief; for I have made him know I have a servant comes with me along, That stays upon me, whose persuasion is I come about my brother.
'Tis well borne up.I have not yet made known to MarianaA word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!
I pray you, be acquainted with this maid;She comes to do you good.
I do desire the like.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
Take, then, this your companion by the hand, Who hath a story ready for your ear. I shall attend your leisure: but make haste; The vaporous night approaches.
Will't please you walk aside?
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report Run with these false and most contrarious quests Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit Make thee the father of their idle dreams And rack thee in their fancies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Welcome, how agreed?
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,If you advise it.
It is not my consent,But my entreaty too.
Little have you to sayWhen you depart from him, but, soft and low,"Remember now my brother."
Fear me not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all. He is your husband on a pre-contract: To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, Sith that the justice of your title to him Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go: Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut off a woman's head.
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a notorious bawd.
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there?
Do you call, sir?
Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.
A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.
Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turnthe scale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray, sir, by your good favour,—for surely, sir, agood favour you have, but that you have a hanginglook,—do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?
Ay, sir; a mystery
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery: but what mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be hanged, I cannot imagine.
Sir, it is a mystery.
Proof?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be too little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's apparel fits your thief.
Are you agreed?
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman isa more penitent trade than your bawd; he dothoftener ask forgiveness.
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axeto-morrow four o'clock.
Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death: 'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labourWhen it lies starkly in the traveller's bones:He will not wake.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who can do good on him?Well, go, prepare yourself. [Knocking within] But, hark, what noise?Heaven give your spirits comfort!
By and by.I hope it is some pardon or reprieveFor the most gentle Claudio.
Welcome father.
The best and wholesomest spirts of the nightEnvelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
None, since the curfew rung.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not Isabel?
No.
They will, then, ere't be long.
What comfort is for Claudio?
There's some in hope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is a bitter deputy.
Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd Even with the stroke and line of his great justice: He doth with holy abstinence subdue That in himself which he spurs on his power To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous; But this being so, he's just. [Knocking within] Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost: seldom when The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [Knocking within] How now! what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.
There he must stay until the officerArise to let him in: he is call'd up.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,But he must die to-morrow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None, sir, none.
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,You shall hear more ere morning.
Happily You something know; yet I believe there comes No countermand; no such example have we: Besides, upon the very siege of justice Lord Angelo hath to the public ear Profess'd the contrary.
This is his lordship's man.
And here comes Claudio's pardon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Giving a paper] My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for, as I take it, it is almost day.
I shall obey him.
[aside] This is his pardon, purchased by such sin For which the pardoner himself is in. Hence hath offence his quick celerity, When it is born in high authority: When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended, That for the fault's love is the offender friended. Now, sir, what news?
I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remissin mine office, awakens me with this unwontedputting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used itbefore.
Pray you, let's hear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by four of the clock; and in the afternoon Barnardine: for my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed; with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.' What say you to this, sir?
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in theafternoon?
A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; onethat is a prisoner nine years old.
How came it that the absent duke had not eitherdelivered him to his liberty or executed him? Ihave heard it was ever his manner to do so.
His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and,indeed, his fact, till now in the government of LordAngelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is now apparent?
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
Hath he born himself penitently in prison? howseems he to be touched?
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.
He wants advice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty of the prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.
More of him anon. There is written in your brow, provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.
Pray, sir, in what?
In the delaying death.
A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited, and an express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if myinstructions may be your guide. Let this Barnardinebe this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it. Shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death: you know the course is common. If any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against it with my life.
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To him, and to his substitutes.
You will think you have made no offence, if the dukeavouch the justice of your dealing?
But what likelihood is in that?
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the duke: you know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is not strange to you.
I know them both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The contents of this is the return of the duke: you shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you shall find, within these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenor; perchance of the duke's death; perchance entering into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession: one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here's young Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger, ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not much in request, for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar. Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed Pots, and, I think, forty more; all great doers in our trade, and are now "for the Lord's sake."
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged.Master Barnardine!
What, ho, Barnardine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Within] A pox o' your throats! Who makes thatnoise there? What are you?
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be sogood, sir, to rise and be put to death.
[Within] Away, you rogue, away! I am sleepy.
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you areexecuted, and sleep afterwards.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go in to him, and fetch him out.
He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
Very ready, sir.
How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into yourprayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am notfitted for 't.
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night,and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep thesounder all the next day.
Look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: dowe jest now, think you?
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastilyyou are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfortyou and pray with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Friar, not I. I have been drinking hard all night, and I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not consent to die this day, that's certain.
O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech youLook forward on the journey you shall go.
I swear I will not die to-day for any man'spersuasion.
But hear you.
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me,come to my ward; for thence will not I to-day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart!After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;And to transport him in the mind he isWere damnable.
Here in the prison, father, There died this morning of a cruel fever One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate, A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head Just of his colour. What if we do omit This reprobate till he were well inclined; And satisfy the deputy with the visage Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
O , 'tis an accident that heaven provides! Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on Prefix'd by Angelo: see this be done, And sent according to command; whiles I Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This shall be done, good father, presently. But Barnardine must die this afternoon: And how shall we continue Claudio, To save me from the danger that might come If he were known alive?
Let this be done. Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio: Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting To the under generation, you shall find Your safety manifested.
I am your free dependant.
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
Now will I write letters to Angelo,— The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents Shall witness to him I am near at home, And that, by great injunctions, I am bound To enter publicly: him I'll desire To meet me at the consecrated fount A league below the city; and from thence, By cold gradation and well-balanced form, We shall proceed with Angelo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;For I would commune with you of such thingsThat want no ear but yours.
I'll make all speed.
[Within] Peace, ho, be here!
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know If yet her brother's pardon be come hither: But I will keep her ignorant of her good, To make her heavenly comforts of despair, When it is least expected.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ho, by your leave!
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
The better, given me by so holy a man.Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world:His head is off and sent to Angelo.
Nay, but it is not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter,In your close patience.
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
You shall not be admitted to his sight.
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel!Injurious world! most damned Angelo!
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot; Forbear it therefore; give your cause to heaven. Mark what I say, which you shall find By every syllable a faithful verity: The duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes; One of our convent, and his confessor, Gives me this instance: already he hath carried Notice to Escalus and Angelo, Who do prepare to meet him at the gates, There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom In that good path that I would wish it go, And you shall have your bosom on this wretch, Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart, And general honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am directed by you.
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give; 'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return: Say, by this token, I desire his company At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo Accuse him home and home. For my poor self, I am combined by a sacred vow And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter: Command these fretting waters from your eyes With a light heart; trust not my holy order, If I pervert your course. Who's here?
Good even. Friar, where's the provost?
Not within, sir.
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set me to 't. But they say the duke will be here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother: if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to yourreports; but the best is, he lives not in them.
Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do:he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.
Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
Nay, tarry; I'll go along with theeI can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.
You have told me too many of him already, sir, ifthey be true; if not true, none were enough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
Did you such a thing?
Yes, marry, did I but I was fain to forswear it;they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.
By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end:if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little ofit. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
I guess not.
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes i' the morn; I 'll call you at your house: give notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet him.
I shall, sir. Fare you well.
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant And dull to all proceedings. A deflower'd maid! And by an eminent body that enforced The law against it! But that her tender shame Will not proclaim against her maiden loss, How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no; For my authority bears of a credent bulk, That no particular scandal once can touch But it confounds the breather. He should have lived, Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense, Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge, By so receiving a dishonour'd life With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived! A lack, when once our grace we have forgot, Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.
These letters at fit time deliver me. The provost knows our purpose and our plot. The matter being afoot, keep your instruction, And hold you ever to our special drift; Though sometimes you do blench from this to that, As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house, And tell him where I stay: give the like notice To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus, And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate; But send me Flavius first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall be speeded well.
I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste: Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.
To speak so indirectly I am loath: I would say the truth; but to accuse him so, That is your part: yet I am advised to do it; He says, to veil full purpose.
Be ruled by him.
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure He speak against me on the adverse side, I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic That's bitter to sweet end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would Friar Peter—
O, peace! the friar is come.
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit, Where you may have such vantage on the duke, He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded; The generous and gravest citizens Have hent the gates, and very near upon The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
Happy return be to your royal grace!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Many and hearty thankings to you both. We have made inquiry of you; and we hear Such goodness of your justice, that our soul Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, Forerunning more requital.
You make my bonds still greater.
O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it, To lock it in the wards of covert bosom, When it deserves, with characters of brass, A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand, And let the subject see, to make them know That outward courtesies would fain proclaim Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus, You must walk by us on our other hand; And good supporters are you.
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.
Justice, O royal duke! Vail your regard Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid! O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye By throwing it on any other object Till you have heard me in my true complaint And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief.Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice:Reveal yourself to him.
O worthy duke, You bid me seek redemption of the devil: Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak Must either punish me, not being believed, Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm:She hath been a suitor to me for her brotherCut off by course of justice,—
By course of justice!
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak: That Angelo's forsworn; is it not strange? That Angelo's a murderer; is 't not strange? That Angelo is an adulterous thief, An hypocrite, a virgin-violator; Is it not strange and strange?
Nay, it is ten times strange.
It is not truer he is Angelo Than this is all as true as it is strange: Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth To the end of reckoning.
Away with her! Poor soul,She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.
O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest There is another comfort than this world, That thou neglect me not, with that opinion That I am touch'd with madness! Make not impossible That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground, May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute As Angelo; even so may Angelo, In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms, Be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince: If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more, Had I more name for badness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By mine honesty, If she be mad,—as I believe no other,— Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, Such a dependency of thing on thing, As e'er I heard in madness.
O gracious duke, Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason For inequality; but let your reason serve To make the truth appear where it seems hid, And hide the false seems true.
Many that are not madHave, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?
I am the sister of one Claudio, Condemn'd upon the act of fornication To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo: I, in probation of a sisterhood, Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio As then the messenger,—
That's I, an't like your grace: I came to her from Claudio, and desired her To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo For her poor brother's pardon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's he indeed.
You were not bid to speak.
No, my good lord;Nor wish'd to hold my peace.
I wish you now, then; Pray you, take note of it: and when you have A business for yourself, pray heaven you then Be perfect.
I warrant your honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The warrants for yourself; take heed to't.
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,—
Right.
It may be right; but you are i' the wrongTo speak before your time. Proceed.
I wentTo this pernicious caitiff deputy,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's somewhat madly spoken.
Pardon it;The phrase is to the matter.
Mended again. The matter; proceed.
In brief, to set the needless process by, How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd, How he refell'd me, and how I replied,— For this was of much length, —the vile conclusion I now begin with grief and shame to utter: He would not, but by gift of my chaste body To his concupiscible intemperate lust, Release my brother; and, after much debatement, My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour, And I did yield to him: but the next morn betimes, His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant For my poor brother's head.
This is most likely!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, that it were as like as it is true!
By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st, Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour In hateful practise. First, his integrity Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason That with such vehemency he should pursue Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended, He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on: Confess the truth, and say by whose advice Thou camest here to complain.
And is this all? Then, O you blessed ministers above, Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe, As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer! To prison with her! Shall we thus permit A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall On him so near us? This needs must be a practise. Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar; I do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord For certain words he spake against your grace In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.
Words against me? this is a good friar, belike!And to set on this wretched woman hereAgainst our substitute! Let this friar be found.
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar,A very scurvy fellow.
Blessed be your royal grace! I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman Most wrongfully accused your substitute, Who is as free from touch or soil with her As she from one ungot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We did believe no less.Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
I know him for a man divine and holy; Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler, As he's reported by this gentleman; And, on my trust, a man that never yet Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
My lord, most villanously; believe it.
Well, he in time may come to clear himself; But at this instant he is sick my lord, Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request, Being come to knowledge that there was complaint Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither, To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know Is true and false; and what he with his oath And all probation will make up full clear, Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman. To justify this worthy nobleman, So vulgarly and personally accused, Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes, Till she herself confess it.
Good friar, let's hear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo? O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools! Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo; In this I'll be impartial; be you judge Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar? First, let her show her face, and after speak.
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my faceUntil my husband bid me.
What, are you married?
No, my lord.
Are you a maid?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my lord.
A widow, then?
Neither, my lord.
Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them areneither maid, widow, nor wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Silence that fellow: I would he had some causeTo prattle for himself.
Well, my lord.
My lord; I do confess I ne'er was married; And I confess besides I am no maid: I have known my husband; yet my husband Knows not that ever he knew me.
He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, my lord.
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
Now I come to't my lord She that accuses him of fornication, In self-same manner doth accuse my husband, And charges him my lord, with such a time When I'll depose I had him in mine arms With all the effect of love.
Charges she more than me?
Not that I know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No? you say your husband.
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.
My husband bids me; now I will unmask. [Unveiling] This is that face, thou cruel Angelo, Which once thou sworest was worth the looking on; This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract, Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body That took away the match from Isabel, And did supply thee at thy garden-house In her imagined person.
Know you this woman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Carnally, she says.
Sirrah, no more!
Enough, my lord.
My lord, I must confess I know this woman: And five years since there was some speech of marriage Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off, Partly for that her promised proportions Came short of composition, but in chief For that her reputation was disvalued In levity: since which time of five years I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, Upon my faith and honour.
Noble prince, As there comes light from heaven and words from breath, As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, I am affianced this man's wife as strongly As words could make up vows: and, my good lord, But Tuesday night last gone in's garden-house He knew me as a wife. As this is true, Let me in safety raise me from my knees Or else for ever be confixed here, A marble monument!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did but smile till now: Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive These poor informal women are no more But instruments of some more mightier member That sets them on: let me have way, my lord, To find this practise out.
Ay, with my heart And punish them to your height of pleasure. Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman, Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths, Though they would swear down each particular saint, Were testimonies against his worth and credit That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus, Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived. There is another friar that set them on; Let him be sent for.
Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed Hath set the women on to this complaint: Your provost knows the place where he abides And he may fetch him.
Go do it instantly.
And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin, Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth, Do with your injuries as seems you best, In any chastisement: I for a while will leave you; But stir not you till you have well determined Upon these slanderers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, we'll do it throughly.
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew thatFriar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?
"Cucullus non facit monachum:" honest in nothingbut in his clothes; and one that hath spoke mostvillanous speeches of the duke.
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come andenforce them against him: we shall find this friar anotable fellow.
As any in Vienna, on my word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her.
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; youshall see how I'll handle her.
Not better than he, by her own report.
Say you?
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately,she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly,she'll be ashamed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will go darkly to work with her.
That's the way; for women are light at midnight.
Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies allthat you have said.
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of; here withthe provost.
In very good time: speak not you to him till wecall upon you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mum.
Come, sir: did you set these women on to slanderLord Angelo? they have confessed you did.
'Tis false.
How! know you where you are?
Respect to your great place! and let the devilBe sometime honour'd for his burning throne!Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The duke's in us; and we will hear you speak:Look you speak justly.
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls, Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox? Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone? Then is your cause gone too. The duke's unjust, Thus to retort your manifest appeal, And put your trial in the villain's mouth Which here you come to accuse.
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar, Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth And in the witness of his proper ear, To call him villain? and then to glance from him To the duke himself, to tax him with injustice? Take him hence; to the rack with him! We'll touse you Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose. What "unjust!"
Be not so hot; the duke Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he Dare rack his own: his subject am I not, Nor here provincial. My business in this state Made me a looker on here in Vienna, Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble Till it o'er-run the stew; laws for all faults, But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop, As much in mock as mark.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?Is this the man that you did tell us of?
'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:do you know me?
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: Imet you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.
O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of theduke?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most notedly, sir.
Do you so, sir? And was the duke a fleshmonger, afool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you makethat my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; andmuch more, much worse.
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by thenose for thy speeches?
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark, how the villain would close now, after histreasonable abuses!
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak no more. Away with those giglots too, and with the other confederate companion!
[To Provost] Stay, sir; stay awhile.
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.
Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your knave's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour! Will't not off? [Pulls off the friar's hood, and discovers DUKE VINCENTIO]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke. First, provost, let me bail these gentle three. [to Lucio] Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.
This may prove worse than hanging.
[To ESCALUS] What you have spoke I pardon: sit you down: We'll borrow place of him. [To ANGELO] Sir, by your leave. Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence, That yet can do thee office? If thou hast, Rely upon it till my tale be heard, And hold no longer out.
O my dread lord, I should be guiltier than my guiltiness, To think I can be undiscernible, When I perceive your grace, like power divine, Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince, No longer session hold upon my shame, But let my trial be mine own confession: Immediate sentence then and sequent death Is all the grace I beg.
Come hither, Mariana.Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I was, my lord.
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly. Do you the office, friar; which consummate, Return him here again. Go with him, provost.
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonourThan at the strangeness of it.
Come hither, Isabel. Your friar is now your prince: as I was then Advertising and holy to your business, Not changing heart with habit, I am still Attorney'd at your service.
O, give me pardon,That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'dYour unknown sovereignty!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are pardon'd, Isabel: And now, dear maid, be you as free to us. Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart; And you may marvel why I obscured myself, Labouring to save his life, and would not rather Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid, It was the swift celerity of his death, Which I did think with slower foot came on, That brain'd my purpose. But, peace be with him! That life is better life, past fearing death, Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort, So happy is your brother.
I do, my lord.
For this new-married man approaching here, Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd Your well defended honour, you must pardon For Mariana's sake: but as he adjudged your brother,— Being criminal, in double violation Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach Thereon dependent, for your brother's life,— The very mercy of the law cries out Most audible, even from his proper tongue, 'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!' Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure; Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE. Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested; Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage. We do condemn thee to the very block Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste. Away with him!
O my most gracious lord,I hope you will not mock me with a husband.
It is your husband mock'd you with a husband. Consenting to the safeguard of your honour, I thought your marriage fit; else imputation, For that he knew you, might reproach your life And choke your good to come; for his possessions, Although by confiscation they are ours, We do instate and widow you withal, To buy you a better husband.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O my dear lord,I crave no other, nor no better man.
Never crave him; we are definitive.
Gentle my liege,— [Kneeling]
You do but lose your labour.Away with him to death! [To LUCIO] Now, sir, to you.
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part; Lend me your knees, and all my life to come I'll lend you all my life to do you service.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Against all sense you do importune her: Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact, Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break, And take her hence in horror.
Isabel, Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me; Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all. They say, best men are moulded out of faults; And, for the most, become much more the better For being a little bad: so may my husband. O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?
He dies for Claudio's death.
Most bounteous sir, Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd, As if my brother lived: I partly think A due sincerity govern'd his deeds, Till he did look on me: since it is so, Let him not die. My brother had but justice, In that he did the thing for which he died: For Angelo, His act did not o'ertake his bad intent, And must be buried but as an intent That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects; Intents but merely thoughts.
Merely, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say. I have bethought me of another fault. Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded At an unusual hour?
It was commanded so.
Had you a special warrant for the deed?
No, my good lord; it was by private message.
For which I do discharge you of your office:Give up your keys.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon me, noble lord: I thought it was a fault, but knew it not; Yet did repent me, after more advice; For testimony whereof, one in the prison, That should by private order else have died, I have reserved alive.
What's he?
His name is Barnardine.
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.
I am sorry, one so learned and so wise As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd, Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood. And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sorry that such sorrow I procure: And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart That I crave death more willingly than mercy; 'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.
Which is that Barnardine?
This, my lord.
There was a friar told me of this man. Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul. That apprehends no further than this world, And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd: But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all; And pray thee take this mercy to provide For better times to come. Friar, advise him; I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's that?
This is another prisoner that I saved. Who should have died when Claudio lost his head; As like almost to Claudio as himself. [Unmuffles CLAUDIO]
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake Is he pardon'd; and, for your lovely sake, Give me your hand and say you will be mine. He is my brother too: but fitter time for that. By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe; Methinks I see a quickening in his eye. Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well: Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours. I find an apt remission in myself; And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon. [To LUCIO] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward, One all of luxury, an ass, a madman; Wherein have I so deserved of you, That you extol me thus?
'Faith, my lord. I spoke it but according to the trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would please you I might be whipt.
Whipt first, sir, and hanged after. Proclaim it, provost, round about the city. Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow, As I have heard him swear himself there's one Whom he begot with child, let her appear, And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd, Let him be whipt and hang'd.
I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her. Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison; And see our pleasure herein executed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,whipping, and hanging.
Slandering a prince deserves it.
She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore. Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo: I have confess'd her and I know her virtue. Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness: There's more behind that is more gratulate. Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy: We shill employ thee in a worthier place. Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home The head of Ragozine for Claudio's: The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel, I have a motion much imports your good; Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline, What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine. So, bring us to our palace; where we'll show What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.
I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Aragon comes this night to Messina.
He is very near by this. He was not three leagues off when I left him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
But few of any sort, and none of name.
A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings homefull numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young Florentine called Claudio.
Much deserved on his part, and equally remembered by Don Pedro. He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of alion. He hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how.
He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him—even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness.
Did he break out into tears?
In great measure.
A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than those that are so washed. How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!
I pray you, is Signor Montanto returned from the wars or no?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know none of that name, lady. There was none such in the army of any sort.
What is he that you ask for, niece?
My cousin means Signor Benedick of Padua.
Oh, he’s returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.
He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight, and my uncle’s Fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid and challenged him at the bird-bolt. I pray you, how many hath he killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath he killed? For indeed I promised to eat all of his killing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, niece, you tax Signor Benedick too much, but he’ll be meet with you, I doubt it not.
He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. He is a very valiant trencherman. He hath an excellent stomach.
And a good soldier too, lady.
And a good soldier to a lady, but what is he to a lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honorable virtues.
It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuffed man. But for the stuffing—well, we are all mortal.
You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signor Benedick and her. They never meet but there’s a skirmish of wit between them.
Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one, so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother.
Is ’t possible?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very easily possible. He wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
No. An he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young squarer nowthat will make a voyage with him to the devil?
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! He is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will cost him a thousand pound ere a be cured.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will hold friends with you, lady.
Do, good friend.
You will never run mad, niece.
No, not till a hot January.
Don Pedro is approached.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Signor Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace, for trouble being gone, comfort should remain, but when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.
You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is your daughter.
Her mother hath many times told me so.
Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signor Benedick, no, for then were you a child.
You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by this what you are, being a man. Truly, the lady fathers herself.—Be happy, lady, for you are like an honorable father.
If Signor Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.
I wonder that you will still be talking, Signor Benedick. Nobody marks you.
What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet living?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it possible disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as Signor Benedick? Courtesy itselfmust convert to disdain if you come in her presence.
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted. And I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.
A dear happiness to women. They would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood I am of your humor for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me.
God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some gentle-man or other shall ’scape a predestinate scratched face.
Scratching could not make it worse an ’twere such a face as yours were.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer. But keep your way, i' God’s name. I have done.
You always end with a jade’s trick. I know you of old.
That is the sum of all, Leonato. —Signior Claudio and Signior Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. [to DON JOHN] Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
I thank you. I am not of many words, but I thank you.
Please it your Grace lead on?
Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I noted her not, but I looked on her.
Is she not a modest young lady?
Do you question me as an honest man should do, for my simple true judgment? Or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?
No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
Why, i' faith, methinks she’s too low for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise. Only this commendation I can afford her,that were she other than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, I do not like her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how thou lik’st her.
Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
Can the world buy such a jewel?
Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this witha sad brow? Or do you play the flouting jack, to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the song?
In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I lookedon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter. There’s her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of December. But I hope you have nointent to turn husband, have you?
I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
Is ’t come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again? Go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away Sundays. Look, Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
What secret hath held you here that you followed not to Leonato’s?
I would your grace would constrain me to tell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I charge thee on thy allegiance.
You hear, Count Claudio? I can be secret as a dumb man,I would have you think so, but on my allegiance—mark you this, on my allegiance— [to DON PEDRO] he is in love. With who? Now, that is your Grace’s part. Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato’s short daughter.
If this were so, so were it uttered.
Like the old tale, my lord: “It is not so nor ’twas not so but, indeed, God forbid it should be so.”
If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.
You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
By my troth, I speak my thought.
And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I love her, I feel.
That she is worthy, I know.
That I neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion that fire cannotmelt out of me. I will die in it at the stake.
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.
And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That a woman conceived me, I thank her. That she brought me up, I likewise give her most humble thanks. But that I will have a recheat winded in my forehead or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust none. And the fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I willlive a bachelor.
I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord, not with love. Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker’s pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind Cupid.
Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wiltprove a notable argument.
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called Adam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, as time shall try. In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.
The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedickbear it, pluck off the bull’s horns and set them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write “Here is good horse to hire”let them signify under my sign “Here you may see Benedick the married man.”
If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
I look for an earthquake too, then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, you temporize with the hours. In the meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato’s. Commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.
I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage, and so I commit you—
To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had it—
The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.
Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments and the guards are but slightly basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience. And so I leave you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My liege, your highness now may do me good.
My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how, And thou shalt see how apt it is to learnAny hard lesson that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?
No child but Hero; she’s his only heir.Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
O, my lord, When you went onward on this ended action, I looked upon her with a soldier’s eye, That liked but had a rougher task in hand Than to drive liking to the name of love. But now I am returned and that war thoughts Have left their places vacant, in their rooms Come thronging soft and delicate desires, All prompting me how fair young Hero is, Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou wilt be like a lover presently And tire the hearer with a book of words. If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, And I will break with her and with her father, And thou shalt have her. Was ’t not to this end That thou began’st to twist so fine a story?
How sweetly you do minister to love, That know love’s grief by his complexion! But lest my liking might too sudden seem, I would have salved it with a longer treatise.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood? The fairest grant is the necessity. Look what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest, And I will fit thee with the remedy. I know we shall have reveling tonight. I will assume thy part in some disguise And tell fair Hero I am Claudio, And in her bosom I’ll unclasp my heart And take her hearing prisoner with the force And strong encounter of my amorous tale. Then after to her father will I break, And the conclusion is, she shall be thine. In practice let us put it presently.
How now, brother, where is my cousin, your son? Hath he provided this music?
He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are they good?
As the events stamps them, but they have a good cover; they show well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my niece yourdaughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with youof it.
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
A good sharp fellow. I will send for him, and questionhim yourself.
No, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself. But I will acquaint my daughter withal, that shemay be the better prepared for an answer if peradventure this be true. Go you and tell her of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cousins, you know what you have to do.—O, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me and I will use your skill.—Good cousin, have a care this busy time.
What the goodyear, my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds. Therefore the sadness is without limit.
You should hear reason.
And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.
I wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou art, born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicineto a mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what I am. I must be sad when I have cause and smile at no man’s jests, eat when I have stomach and wait for no man’s leisure, sleep when I am drowsy and tend on no man’s business, laugh when I am merry and claw no man in his humor.
Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment. You have of late stood out against your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself. It is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest.
I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any. In this, though I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but I am a plain-dealing villain. I am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I would do my liking. In the meantime, let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me.
Can you make no use of your discontent?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I make all use of it, for I use it only. Who comes here?
What news, Borachio?
I came yonder from a great supper. The Prince your brother is royally entertained by Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on? What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
Marry, it is your brother’s right hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who? The most exquisite Claudio?
Even he.
A proper squire. And who, and who? Which way looks he?
Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. I whipped me behind the arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the Prince should woo Hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count Claudio.
Come, come, let us thither. This may prove food to my displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow. If I can cross him any way, I bless myself every way. You are both sure, and will assist me?
To the death, my lord.
Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the greater that I am subdued. Would the cook were o' my mind! Shallwe go prove what’s to be done?
We’ll wait upon your lordship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was not Count John here at supper?
I saw him not.
How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am heartburned an hour after.
He is of a very melancholy disposition.
He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and Benedick. The one is too likean image and says nothing, and the other too like my lady’s eldest son, evermore tattling.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then half Signor Benedick’s tongue in Count John’s mouth, and half Count John’s melancholy in Signor Benedick’s face—
With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world, if he could get her goodwill.
By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
In faith, she’s too curst.
Too curst is more than curst. I shall lessen God’s sending that way, for it is said, “God sends a curst cowshort horns,” but to a cow too curst, he sends none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.
Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing I am at him upon my knees every morning and evening. Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face! I had rather lie in the woolen.
You may light on a husband that hath no beard.
What should I do with him? Dress him in my apparel and make him my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he that hath no beard isless than a man; and he that is more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a man, I am not forhim. Therefore I will even take sixpence in earnest of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.
Well then, go you into hell?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his head, and say, “Get you to heaven, Beatrice, get you to heaven; here’s no place for you maids.” So deliver I up my apes and away to Saint Peter. For the heavens, he shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry as the dayis long.
[to HERO] Well, niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.
Yes, faith, it is my cousin’s duty to make curtsy and say, “Father, as it please you.” But yet for all that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy and say, “Father, as it please me.”
[to HERO] Daughter, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. Would it not grieve a woman to be overmastered with a piece of valiant dust? To make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl? No, uncle, I’ll none. Adam’s sons are my brethren, and truly I hold it a sin to matchin my kindred.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to HERO] Daughter, remember what I told you. If the Prince do solicit you in that kind, you know your answer.
The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in good time. If the Prince be too important, tellhim there is measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. For hear me, Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a measure, and a cinquepace. The first suit is hot and hasty like a Scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly modest as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster and faster till he sink into his grave.
Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.
I have a good eye, uncle. I can see a church by daylight.
The revelers are entering, brother. Make good room.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?
So you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say nothing, I am yours for the walk, and especially when I walk away.
With me in your company?
I may say so when I please.
And when please you to say so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I like your favor, for God defend the lute should be like the case!
My visor is Philemon’s roof; within the house is Jove.
Why, then, your visor should be thatched.
Speak low if you speak love.
Well, I would you did like me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill qualities.
Which is one?
I say my prayers aloud.
I love you the better; the hearers may cry “Amen.”
God match me with a good dancer!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Amen.
And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! Answer, clerk.
No more words. The clerk is answered.
I know you well enough. You are Signor Antonio.
At a word, I am not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know you by the waggling of your head.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very man. Here’s his dry hand up and down. You are he, you are he.
At a word, I am not.
Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to, mum, you are he. Graces will appear, and there’s an end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you not tell me who told you so?
No, you shall pardon me.
Nor will you not tell me who you are?
Not now.
That I was disdainful and that I had my good wit out of The Hundred Merry Tales! Well this was Signor Benedick that said so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s he?
I am sure you know him well enough.
Not I, believe me.
Did he never make you laugh?
I pray you, what is he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, he is the Prince’s jester, a very dull fool, only his gift is in devising impossible slanders. None but libertines delight in him, and the commendation is not in his wit but in his villainy, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet. I would he had boarded me.
When I know the gentleman, I’ll tell him what you say.
Do, do. He’ll but break a comparison or two on me, which, peradventure not marked or not laughed at, strikes him into melancholy, and then there’s a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night.
We must follow the leaders.
In every good thing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.
[to BORACHIO] Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it. Theladies follow her, and but one visor remains.
And that is Claudio. I know him by his bearing.
[to CLAUDIO] Are not you Signor Benedick?
You know me well. I am he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signor, you are very near my brother in his love. He is enamored on Hero. I pray you, dissuade him from her. She is no equal for his birth. You may do the part of anhonest man in it.
How know you he loves her?
I heard him swear his affection.
So did I too, and he swore he would marry her tonight.
Come, let us to the banquet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][unmasking] Thus answer I in the name of Benedick, But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio. 'Tis certain so, the Prince woos for himself. Friendship is constant in all other things Save in the office and affairs of love. Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues. Let every eye negotiate for itself And trust no agent, for beauty is a witch Against whose charms faith melteth into blood. This is an accident of hourly proof, Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, Hero.
Count Claudio?
Yea, the same.
Come, will you go with me?
Whither?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even to the next willow, about your own business, county. What fashion will you wear the garland of? Aboutyour neck like an usurer’s chain? Or under your arm like a lieutenant’s scarf? You must wear it one way, forthe Prince hath gat your Hero.
I wish him joy of her.
Why, that’s spoken like an honest drover; so they sell bullocks. But did you think the Prince would have served you thus?
I pray you, leave me.
Ho, now you strike like the blind man. 'Twas the boy that stole your meat, and you’ll beat the post.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it will not be, I’ll leave you.
Alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into sedges. But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The Prince’s fool! Ha, it may be I go under that title because I am merry. Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so reputed! It is the base, though bitter, disposition of Beatrice that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. Well, I’ll berevenged as I may.
Now, Signior, where’s the Count? Did you see him?
Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame. I found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. I told him, and I think I told him true, that your Grace had got the goodwill of this young lady, and I offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be whipped.
To be whipped? What’s his fault?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.
Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The transgression is in the stealer.
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself and the rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stolen his birds' nest.
I will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.
If their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you. The gentleman that danced with her told her she is much wronged by you.
O, she misused me past the endurance of a block! An oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her. My very visor began to assume life and scold with her. She told me, not thinking I had been myself, that Iwas the Prince’s jester, that I was duller than a greatthaw, huddling jest upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon me that I stood like a man at a mark with a whole army shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near her; she would infect to the north star. I would not marry her, though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgressed. She would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire, too. Come, talk not of her. You shall find herthe infernal Ate in good apparel. I would to God some scholar would conjure her, for certainly, while sheis here, a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose because they would go thither. So indeedall disquiet, horror and perturbation follows her.
Look, here she comes.
Will your grace command me any service to the world’s end? I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on. I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of Asia, bring you the length of Prester John’s foot, fetchyou a hair off the great Cham’s beard, do you any embassage to the Pygmies, rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy. You have no employment for me?
None but to desire your good company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God, sir, here’s a dish I love not. I cannot endure my Lady Tongue!
[to BEATRICE] Come, lady, come, you have lost the heartof Signior Benedick.
Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave him use for it, a double heart for his single one. Marry, once before he won it of me with false dice. Therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it.
You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.
So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove the mother of fools. I have brought Count Claudio,whom you sent me to seek.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, Count, wherefore are you sad?
Not sad, my lord.
How then, sick?
Neither, my lord.
The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and somethingof that jealous complexion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true, though,I’ll be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false. —Here,Claudio, I have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won. I have broke with her father and his goodwill obtained. Name the day of marriage, and God give thee joy.
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. His grace hath made the match, and all grace say “Amen” to it.
Speak, Count, ’tis your cue.
Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were but little happy if I could say how much.—Lady, as you are mine, I am yours. I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.
Speak, cousin, or if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss and let not him speak neither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
Yea, my lord. I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy side of care. My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.
And so she doth, cousin.
Good Lord for alliance! Thus goes everyone to the world but I, and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a corner and cry, “Heigh-ho for a husband!”
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would rather have one of your father’s getting. Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.
Will you have me, lady?
No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days. Your Grace is too costly to wear every day. But I beseech your Grace pardon me. I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes you, for out o' question you were born in amerry hour.
No, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was I born.—Cousins, God give you joy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
I cry you mercy, uncle.—By your Grace’s pardon.
By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
There’s little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. She is never sad but when she sleeps, and not eversad then, for I have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing.
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, by no means. She mocks all her wooers out of suit.
She were an excellent wife for Benedick.
O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves mad.
County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
Tomorrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches till love have all his rites.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just sevennight, and a time too brief, too, to have all things answer my mind.
[to CLAUDIO] Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing, but I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shallnot go dully by us. I will in the interim undertake oneof Hercules' labors, which is to bring Signor Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection, th' one with th' other. I would fain have it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction.
My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights' watchings.
And I, my lord.
And you too, gentle Hero?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousinto a good husband.
And Benedick is not the unhopefulest husband that I know. Thus far can I praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved valor, and confirmed honesty. I willteach you how to humor your cousin that she shall fall in love with Benedick. —And I, with your two helps, will so practice on Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer; his glory shall be ours, for we are the only love gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.
Yea, my lord, but I can cross it.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me. I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. Howcanst thou cross this marriage?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.
Show me briefly how.
I think I told your lordship a year since how much I amin the favor of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.
I remember.
I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her lady’s chamber window.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the Prince your brother. Spare not to tell him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying the renowned Claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.
What proof shall I make of that?
Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you for any other issue?
Only to despite them, I will endeavor anything.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go then, find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count Claudio alone. Tell them that you know that Hero loves me. Intend a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio, as in love of your brother’s honor, who hath made this match, and his friend’s reputation, who is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid,that you have discovered thus. They will scarcely believe this without trial. Offer them instances, which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window, hear me call Margaret “Hero,” hear Margaret term me “Claudio,” and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall beabsent, and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero’s disloyalty that jealousy shall be called assurance and all the preparation overthrown.
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practice. Be cunning in the working this, and thy feeis a thousand ducats.
Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
Boy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signior?
In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to mein the orchard.
I am here already, sir.
I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors tolove, will, after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love— and such a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe. I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not be sworn but love may transform meto an oyster, but I’ll take my oath on it, till he havemade an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise,yet I am well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that’s certain; wise, or I’ll none; virtuous, or I’ll never cheapen her;fair, or I’ll ever look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what color it please God. Ha! The Prince and MonsieurLove! I will hide me in the arbor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, shall we hear this music?
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,As hushed on purpose to grace harmony!
[aside to CLAUDIO] See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
[aside to DON PEDRO] O, very well, my lord. The music ended,We’ll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
Come, Balthasar, we’ll hear that song again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice To slander music anymore than once.
It is the witness still of excellencyTo put a strange face on his own perfection.I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing, Since many a wooer doth commence his suit To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos, Yet will he swear he loves.
Nay, pray thee, come,Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument,Do it in notes.
Note this before my notes: There’s not a note of mine that’s worth the noting.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!Note notes, forsooth, and nothing.
[aside] Now, divine air! Now is his soul ravished. Is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men’s bodies? Well, a horn for my money, when all’s done.
[singing] Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, Men were deceivers ever, One foot in sea and one on shore, To one thing constant never. Then sigh not so, but let them go, And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey, nonny nonny. Sing no more ditties, sing no mo Of dumps so dull and heavy. The fraud of men was ever so, Since summer first was leavy. Then sigh not so, but let them go And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey, nonny nonny.
By my troth, a good song.
And an ill singer, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, no, no, faith, thou sing’st well enough for a shift.
[aside] An he had been a dog that should have howled thus, they would have hanged him. And I pray God his badvoice bode no mischief. I had as lief have heard the night raven, come what plague could have come after it.
Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee, get us some excellent music, for tomorrow night we wouldhave it at the Lady Hero’s chamber window
The best I can, my lord.
Do so. Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of today, that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signor Benedick?
Oh, ay. [aside to DON PEDRO] Stalk on, stalk on; the fowl sits.—I did never think that lady would have loved any man.
No, nor I neither, but most wonderful that she should so dote on Signor Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.
[aside] Is ’t possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged affection, itis past the infinite of thought.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May be she doth but counterfeit.
Faith, like enough.
O God! Counterfeit? There was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.
Why, what effects of passion shows she?
[aside to LEONATO] Bait the hook well; this fish will bite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What effects, my lord? She will sit you—you heard my daughter tell you how.
She did indeed.
How, how I pray you? You amaze me. I would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.
I would have sworn it had, my lord, especially against Benedick.
[Aside] I should think this a gull but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such reverence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to DON PEDRO] He hath ta'en th' infection. Hold it up.
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
No, and swears she never will. That’s her torment.
'Tis true indeed, so your daughter says. “Shall I,” says she, “that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him that I love him?”
This says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she’ll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. My daughter tells us all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your daughter told.
Oh, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she found “Benedick” and “Beatrice” between the sheet?
That.
O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, railed at herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her. “I measure him,” says she, “by my own spirit, for I should flout him if he writ to me, yea, though I love him, I should.”
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses: “O sweet Benedick! God give me patience!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She doth indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeared she will do a desperate outrage to herself. It is very true.
It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, ifshe will not discover it.
To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse.
An he should, it were an alms to hang him. She’s an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.
And she is exceeding wise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In every thing but in loving Benedick.
Oh, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry for her, as I have just cause, beingher uncle and her guardian.
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me. I would have daffed all other respects and made her half myself.I pray you tell Benedick of it and hear what he will say.
Were it good, think you?
Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die if he love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will die if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She doth well. If she should make tender of her love, ’tis very possible he’ll scorn it, for the man, as you know all, hath a contemptible spirit.
He is a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
Before God, and in my mind, very wise.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I take him to be valiant.
As Hector, I assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great discretion or undertakes them with a most Christian-like fear.
If he do fear God, he must necessarily keep peace. If he break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.
And so will he do, for the man doth fear God, howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make. Well, I am sorry for your niece. Shall we go seek Benedick and tell him of her love?
Never tell him, my lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, that’s impossible. She may wear her heart out first.
Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter. Let it cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.
My lord, will you walk? Dinner is ready.
[aside to DON PEDRO and LEONATO] If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never trust my expectation.
[aside to LEONATO] Let there be the same net spread forher, and that must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be when they hold one an opinion of another’s dotage, and no such matter. That’s the scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][coming forward] This can be no trick. The conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady. It seems her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it must be requited! I hear how I am censured. They sy I will bear myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her. They say, too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did never think to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they that hear their detractions and can put them to mending. They say the lady is fair; ’tisa truth, I can bear them witness. And virtuous; ’tis so, I cannot reprove it. And wise, but for loving me; bymy troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of her folly, for I will be horribly in love with her! I may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because I have railed so long against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humor? No! The world must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live tillI were married. Here comes Beatrice. By this day, she’sa fair lady. I do spy some marks of love in her.
Against my will, I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me. If it had been painful, I would not have come.
You take pleasure then in the message?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife’s point and choke a daw withal. You have no stomach, Signior. Fare you well.
Ha! “Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.” There’s a double meaning in that. “I took nomore pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me.” That’s as much as to say, “Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.” If I do not take pity of her, I am a villain. If I do not love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor. There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice Proposing with the Prince and Claudio. Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us, And bid her steal into the pleachèd bower Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites Made proud by princes, that advance their pride Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her To listen our propose. This is thy office. Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
I’ll make her come, I warrant you, presently.
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come, As we do trace this alley up and down, Our talk must only be of Benedick. When I do name him, let it be thy part To praise him more than ever man did merit. My talk to thee must be how Benedick Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter Is little Cupid’s crafty arrow made, That only wounds by hearsay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now begin,For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
[aside to HERO] The pleasant’st angling is to see the fish Cut with her golden oars the silver stream And greedily devour the treacherous bait. So angle we for Beatrice, who even now Is couchèd in the woodbine coverture. Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
[aside to URSULA ] Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.— [approaching the bower] No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful. I know her spirits are as coy and wild As haggards of the rock.
But are you sureThat Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the Prince and my new-trothèd lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it, But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick, To wish him wrestle with affection And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman Deserve as full as fortunate a bedAs ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
O god of love! I know he doth deserve As much as may be yielded to a man, But Nature never framed a woman’s heart Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice. Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, Misprizing what they look on, and her wit Values itself so highly that to her All matter else seems weak. She cannot love Nor take no shape nor project of affection She is so self-endeared.
Sure, I think so,And therefore certainly it were not goodShe knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man, How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured But she would spell him backward. If fair-faced, She would swear the gentleman should be her sister; If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic, Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed; If low, an agate very vilely cut; If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds; If silent, why, a block moved with none. So turns she every man the wrong side out And never gives to truth and virtue that Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable. But who dare tell her so? If I should speak, She would mock me into air. O, she would laugh me Out of myself, press me to death with wit. Therefore let Benedick, like covered fire, Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly. It were a better death than die with mocks, Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it. Hear what she will say.
No, rather I will go to Benedick And counsel him to fight against his passion; And truly I’ll devise some honest slanders To stain my cousin with. One doth not know How much an ill word may empoison liking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, do not do your cousin such a wrong! She cannot be so much without true judgment, Having so swift and excellent a wit As she is prized to have, as to refuse So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
He is the only man of Italy,Always excepted my dear Claudio.
I pray you, be not angry with me, madam, Speaking my fancy. Signor Benedick, For shape, for bearing, argument and valor, Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it. When are you married, madam?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, every day, tomorrow. Come, go in.I’ll show thee some attires, and have thy counselWhich is the best to furnish me tomorrow.
[aside to HERO] She’s limed, I warrant you. We have caught her, madam.
[aside to URSULA] If it proves so, then loving goes by haps;Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
[coming forward] What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true? Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much? Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu! No glory lives behind the back of such. And Benedick, love on; I will requite thee, Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand. If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee To bind our loves up in a holy band. For others say thou dost deserve, and I Believe it better than reportingly.
I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Aragon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll bring you thither, my lord, if you’ll vouchsafe me.
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbidhim to wear it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. He hath twice or thrice cutCupid’s bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
Gallants, I am not as I have been.
So say I. Methinks you are sadder.
I hope he be in love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang him, truant! There’s no true drop of blood in himto be truly touched with love. If he be sad, he wants money.
I have the toothache.
Draw it.
Hang it!
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, sigh for the toothache?
Where is but a humor or a worm.
Well, everyone can master a grief but he that has it.
Yet say I, he is in love.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy that he hath to strange disguises, as to be a Dutchman today, a Frenchman tomorrow, or in the shape oftwo countries at once, as a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from the hip upward,no doublet. Unless he have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs. He brushes his hat o' mornings. What should that bode?
Hath any man seen him at the barber’s?
No, but the barber’s man hath been seen with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.
Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of abeard.
Nay, he rubs himself with civet. Can you smell him out by that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s as much as to say, the sweet youth’s in love.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
And when was he wont to wash his face?
Yea, or to paint himself? For the which I hear what they say of him.
Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute string and now governed by stops—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude, he is in love.
Nay, but I know who loves him.
That would I know too. I warrant, one that knows him not.
Yes, and his ill conditions, and, in despite of all, dies for him.
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet is this no charm for the toothache.—Old Signior, walk aside with me. I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobbyhorses must not hear.
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!
'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one another when they meet.
My lord and brother, God save you.
Good e'en, brother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
In private?
If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may hear, for whatI would speak of concerns him.
What’s the matter?
[to CLAUDIO] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You know he does.
I know not that, when he knows what I know.
If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
You may think I love you not. Let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I think he holds you well, andin dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage—surely suit ill spent and labor ill bestowed.
Why, what’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I came hither to tell you; and, circumstances shortened, for she has been too long a-talking of, the lady is disloyal.
Who, Hero?
Even she: Leonato’s Hero, your Hero, every man’s Hero.
Disloyal?
The word is too good to paint out her wickedness. I could say she were worse. Think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me tonight, you shall see her chamber window entered, even the night before her wedding day. If you love her then, tomorrow wed her. Butit would better fit your honor to change your mind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to DON PEDRO] May this be so?
I will not think it.
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know. If you will follow me, I will show you enough,and when you have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.
If I see anything tonight why I should not marry her, tomorrow in the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.
And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join withthee to disgrace her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses. Bear it coldly but till midnight and let the issue show itself.
O day untowardly turned!
O mischief strangely thwarting!
O plague right well prevented! So will you say when you have seen the sequel.
Are you good men and true?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince’s watch.
Well, give them their charge, neighbor Dogberry.
First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacole, for they can write and read.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, neighbor Seacole. God hath blessed you with a good name. To be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.
Both which, Master Constable—
You have. I knew it would be your answer. Well, for your favor, sir, why, give God thanks, and make no boastof it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch; therefore bear you the lantern. This is your charge: you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince's name.
How if he will not stand?
Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go and presently call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of a knave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the Prince’s subjects.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince’s subjects.—You shall also make no noise in the streets; for, for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.
We will rather sleep than talk. We know what belongs toa watch.
Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I cannot see how sleeping should offend. Only have a care that your bills be not stolen. Well, youare to call at all the alehouses and bid those that aredrunk get them to bed.
How if they will not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, let them alone till they are sober. If they make you not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them for.
Well, sir.
If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no true man, and for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them, why the moreis for your honesty.
If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?
Truly, by your office you may, but I think they that touch pitch will be defiled. The most peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have been always called a merciful man, partner.
Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who hath any honesty in him.
[to the Watch] If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
Why then, depart in peace and let the child wake her with crying, for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baas will never answer a calf when he bleats.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis very true.
This is the end of the charge. You, constable, are to present the Prince’s own person. If you meet the Prince in the night, you may stay him.
Nay, by 'r Lady, that I think he cannot.
Five shillings to one on ’t, with any man that knows the statutes, he may stay him —marry, not without the Prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is an offense to stay a man against his will.
By 'r lady, I think it be so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha, ha! Well, masters, good night. An there be anymatter of weight chances, call up me. Keep your fellows' counsels and your own; and good night.—Come, neighbor.
Well, masters, we hear our charge. Let us go sit here upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.
One word more, honest neighbors. I pray you watch about Signior Leonato’s door, for the wedding being there tomorrow, there is a great coil tonight. Adieu, bevigitant, I beseech you.
What Conrad!
[aside] Peace! Stir not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Conrad, I say!
Here, man. I am at thy elbow.
Mass, and my elbow itched, I thought there would a scab follow.
I will owe thee an answer for that. And now forward with thy tale.
Stand thee close, then, under this penthouse, for it drizzles rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Some treason, masters. Yet stand close.
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.
Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so rich. For when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what price they will.
I wonder at it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That shows thou art unconfirmed. Thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.
Yes, it is apparel.
I mean the fashion.
Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
Tush, I may as well say the fool’s the fool. But seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion is?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] I know that Deformed. He has been a vile thief this seven year. He goes up and down like a gentleman. I remember his name.
Didst thou not hear somebody?
No, ’twas the vane on the house.
Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty, sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh’s soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god Bel’s priests in the old church-window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?
All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears out more apparel than the man. But art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so, neither. But know that I have tonight wooed Margaret, the Lady Hero’s gentlewoman, by the nameof Hero. She leans me out at her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand times good night. I tell thistale vilely. I should first tell thee how the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter.
And thought they Margaret was Hero?
Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, but the devil my master knew she was Margaret; and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive them, but chiefly by my villainy, which did confirm any slander that Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged, swore he would meether as he was appointed next morning at the temple, andthere, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw o'ernight and send her home again without a husband.
We charge you, in the Prince’s name, stand!
Call up the right Master Constable. We have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And one Deformed is one of them. I know him; he wears a lock.
Masters, masters—
[to BORACHIO] You’ll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.
Masters, never speak, we charge you, let us obey you go with us.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken upof these men’s bills.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A commodity in question, I warrant you.—Come, we’ll obey you.
Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.
I will, lady.
And bid her come hither.
Well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Troth, I think your other rebato were better.
No, pray thee, good Meg, I’ll wear this.
By my troth, ’s not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.
My cousin’s a fool, and thou art another. I’ll wear none but this.
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner; and your gown’s a most rare fashion, i' faith. I saw the Duchess of Milan’s gown that they praise so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, that exceeds, they say.
By my troth, ’s but a nightgown in respect of yours —cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with silver, set withpearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel. But for a fine, quaint,graceful, and excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on ’t.
God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.
'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
Fie upon thee! Art not ashamed?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of what, lady? Of speaking honorably? Is not marriage honorable in a beggar? Is not your lord honorable without marriage? I think you would have me say, “Saving your reverence, a husband.” An bad thinkingdo not wrest true speaking, I’ll offend nobody. Is there any harm in “the heavier for a husband?” None, I think, an it be the right husband and the right wife. Otherwise, ’tis light and not heavy. Ask my Lady Beatriceelse. Here she comes.
Good morrow, coz.
Good morrow, sweet Hero.
Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?
I am out of all other tune, methinks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Clap ’s into “Light o' love.” That goes without a burden. Do you sing it, and I’ll dance it.
Ye light o' love, with your heels! Then, if your husband have stables enough, you’ll see he shall lack nobarns.
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin. 'Tis time you were ready. By my troth, I am exceeding ill. Heigh-ho!
For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For the letter that begins them all, H.
Well, an you be not turned Turk, there’s no more sailing by the star.
What means the fool, trow?
Nothing, I; but God send everyone their heart’s desire.
These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent perfume.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am stuffed, cousin. I cannot smell.
A maid, and stuffed! There’s goodly catching of cold.
Oh, God help me, God help me! How long have you professed apprehension?
Even since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?
It is not seen enough; you should wear it in your cap.By my troth, I am sick.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart. It is the only thing for a qualm.
There thou prick’st her with a thistle.
Benedictus! Why benedictus? You have some moral in this benedictus?
Moral! No, by my troth, I have no moral meaning. I meant plain holy thistle. You may think perchance that Ithink you are in love. Nay, by 'r Lady, I am not such afool to think what I list, nor I list not to think whatI can, nor indeed I cannot think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or that you can be in love. Yet Benedickwas such another, and now is he become a man. He swore he would never marry, and yet now, in despite of his heart, he eats his meat without grudging. And how you may be converted I know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not a false gallop.
Madam, withdraw: the Prince, the Count, Signor Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.
Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
What would you with me, honest neighbor?
Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brief, I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.
Marry, this it is, sir.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.
What is it, my good friends?
Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter. Anold man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, God help, I would desire they were, but, in faith, honest asthe skin between his brows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than I.
Comparisons are odorous. Palabras , neighbor Verges.
Neighbors, you are tedious.
It pleases your Worship to say so, but we are the poor duke’s officers. But truly, for mine own part, if I wereas tedious as a king, I could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
All thy tediousness on me, ah?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, an ’twere a thousand pound more than ’tis, for I hear as good exclamation on your Worship as of any man in the city, and though I be but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.
And so am I.
I would fain know what you have to say.
Marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your Worship’s presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina.
A good old man, sir. He will be talking. As they say, “When the age is in, the wit is out.” God help us, it isa world to see! Well said, i' faith, neighbor Verges. —Well, God’s a good man. An two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but God is to be worshipped, all men are not alike, alas, good neighbor!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, neighbor, he comes too short of you.
Gifts that God gives.
I must leave you.
One word, sir. Our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined before your worship.
Take their examination yourself and bring it me. I am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall be suffigance.
Drink some wine ere you go. Fare you well.
My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.
I’ll wait upon them. I am ready.
Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole. Bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the jail. We are now to examination these men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And we must do it wisely.
We will spare for no wit, I warrant you. Here’s that shall drive some of them to a noncome. Only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication and meet me at the jail.
Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.
[to CLAUDIO] You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To be married to her.—Friar, you come to marry her.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this count?
I do.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, charge you on your souls toutter it.
Know you any, Hero?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None, my lord.
Know you any, count?
I dare make his answer, none.
O, what men dare do! What men may do! What men daily do, not knowing what they do!
How now, interjections? Why, then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stand thee by, Friar.—Father, by your leave, Will you with free and unconstrainèd soul Give me this maid, your daughter?
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back whose worth May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again.
Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.— There, Leonato, take her back again. Give not this rotten orange to your friend. She’s but the sign and semblance of her honor. Behold how like a maid she blushes here! Oh, what authority and show of truth Can cunning sin cover itself withal! Comes not that blood as modest evidence To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear, All you that see her, that she were a maid By these exterior shows? But she is none. She knows the heat of a luxurious bed. Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What do you mean, my lord?
Not to be married,Not to knit my soul to an approvèd wanton.
Dear my lord, if you in your own proofHave vanquished the resistance of her youth And made defeat of her virginity—
I know what you would say: if I have known her, You will say she did embrace me as a husband, And so extenuate the forehand sin. No, Leonato, I never tempted her with word too large But, as a brother to his sister, showed Bashful sincerity and comely love.
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Out on thee, seeming! I will write against it. You seem to me as Dian in her orb, As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown. But you are more intemperate in your blood Than Venus, or those pampered animals That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet Prince, why speak not you?
What should I speak?I stand dishonored, that have gone aboutTo link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
This looks not like a nuptial.
True! O God!
Leonato, stand I here?Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince’s brother? Is this face Hero’s? Are our eyes our own?
All this is so, but what of this, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me but move one question to your daughter,And by that fatherly and kindly powerThat you have in her, bid her answer truly.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
Oh, God defend me! how am I beset!—What kind of catechizing call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that nameWith any just reproach?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, that can Hero! Hero itself can blot out Hero’s virtue. What man was he talked with you yesternight Out at your window betwixt twelve and one? Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
I talked with no man at that hour, my lord.
Why, then are you no maiden. —Leonato, I am sorry you must hear. Upon mine honor, Myself, my brother, and this grievèd count Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain, Confessed the vile encounters they have had A thousand times in secret.
Fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord, Not to be spoke of! There is not chastity enough in language, Without offense, to utter them. —Thus, pretty lady, I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been If half thy outward graces had been placed About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart! But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! Farewell, Thou pure impiety and impious purity. For thee I’ll lock up all the gates of love, And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang, To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm, And never shall it more be gracious.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hath no man’s dagger here a point for me?
Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light, Smother her spirits up.
How doth the lady?
Dead, I think.—Help, uncle!—Hero, why, Hero! Uncle! Signor Benedick! Friar!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Fate! Take not away thy heavy hand!Death is the fairest cover for her shameThat may be wished for.
How now, cousin Hero!
[to HERO] Have comfort, lady.
[to HERO] Dost thou look up?
Yea, wherefore should she not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly thing Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny The story that is printed in her blood?— Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes, For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die, Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames, Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches, Strike at thy life. Grieved I I had but one? Chid I for that at frugal Nature’s frame? O, one too much by thee! Why had I one? Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes? Why had I not with charitable hand Took up a beggar’s issue at my gates, Who, smirchèd thus, and mired with infamy, I might have said, “No part of it is mine; This shame derives itself from unknown loins”? But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised, And mine that I was proud on, mine so much That I myself was to myself not mine, Valuing of her– why, she, O she is fall'n Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea Hath drops too few to wash her clean again And salt too little which may season give To her foul tainted flesh!
Sir, sir, be patient.For my part, I am so attired in wonderI know not what to say.
Oh, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No, truly not, although until last nightI have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Confirmed, confirmed! Oh, that is stronger made Which was before barred up with ribs of iron! Would the two princes lie and Claudio lie, Who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness, Washed it with tears? Hence from her. Let her die.
Hear me a little, For I have only silent been so long, And given way unto this course of fortune, By noting of the lady. I have marked A thousand blushing apparitions To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames In angel whiteness beat away those blushes, And in her eye there hath appeared a fire To burn the errors that these princes hold Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool, Trust not my reading nor my observations, Which with experimental seal doth warrant The tenor of my book; trust not my age, My reverence, calling, nor divinity, If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here Under some biting error.
Friar, it cannot be. Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left Is that she will not add to her damnation A sin of perjury. She not denies it. Why seek’st thou then to cover with excuse That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me. I know none. If I know more of any man alive Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant, Let all my sins lack mercy! —O my father, Prove you that any man with me conversed At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight Maintained the change of words with any creature, Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is some strange misprision in the princes.
Two of them have the very bent of honor, And if their wisdoms be misled in this, The practice of it lives in John the Bastard, Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.
I know not. If they speak but truth of her, These hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honor, The proudest of them shall well hear of it. Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine Nor age so eat up my invention Nor fortune made such havoc of my means Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends But they shall find, awaked in such a kind, Both strength of limb and policy of mind, Ability in means and choice of friends, To quit me of them throughly.
Pause awhile, And let my counsel sway you in this case. Your daughter here the princes left for dead. Let her awhile be secretly kept in And publish it that she is dead indeed. Maintain a mourning ostentation, And on your family’s old monument Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become of this? What will this do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, this, well carried, shall on her behalf Change slander to remorse. That is some good. But not for that dream I on this strange course, But on this travail look for greater birth. She, dying, as it must so be maintained, Upon the instant that she was accused, Shall be lamented, pitied and excused Of every hearer. For it so falls out That what we have we prize not to the worth Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost, Why then we rack the value, then we find The virtue that possession would not show us Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio. When he shall hear she died upon his words, The idea of her life shall sweetly creep Into his study of imagination, And every lovely organ of her life Shall come apparelled in more precious habit, More moving, delicate and full of life, Into the eye and prospect of his soul Than when she lived indeed. Then shall he mourn, If ever love had interest in his liver, And wish he had not so accused her, No, though he thought his accusation true. Let this be so, and doubt not but success Will fashion the event in better shape Than I can lay it down in likelihood. But if all aim but this be leveled false, The supposition of the lady's death Will quench the wonder of her infamy. And if it sort not well, you may conceal her, As best befits her wounded reputation, In some reclusive and religious life, Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you. And though you know my inwardness and love Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio, Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this As secretly and justly as your soul Should with your body.
Being that I flow in grief, The smallest twine may lead me.
'Tis well consented. Presently away, For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.— Come, lady, die to live. This wedding day Perhaps is but prolonged. Have patience and endure.
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
I will not desire that.
You have no reason. I do it freely.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there any way to show such friendship?
A very even way, but no such friend.
May a man do it?
It is a man’s office, but not yours.
I do love nothing in the world so well as you. Is not that strange?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possiblefor me to say I loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet I lie not, I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry for my cousin.
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Do not swear, and eat it.
I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that says I love not you.
Will you not eat your word?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest I love thee.
Why then, God forgive me.
What offense, sweet Beatrice?
You have stayed me in a happy hour. I was about to protest I loved you.
And do it with all thy heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.
Come, bid me do anything for thee.
Kill Claudio.
Ha! Not for the wide world.
You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
I am gone, though I am here. There is no love in you. Nay, I pray you let me go.
Beatrice—
In faith, I will go.
We’ll be friends first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemy?
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? Oh, that I were a man! What, bear her in hand until they come to take hands and then, with public accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated rancor —O God, that I werea man! I would eat his heart in the marketplace.
Hear me, Beatrice—
Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but Beatrice—
Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
Beat—
Princes and counties! Surely, a princely testimony, a goodly count, Count Comfect, a sweet gallant, surely! Oh, that I were a man for his sake! Or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is meltedinto curtsies, valor into compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too. He is now as valiant as Hercules that only tells a lie and swears it. I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieving.
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Enough, I am engaged. I will challenge him. I will kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account. As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your cousin. I must say she is dead, and so, farewell.
Is our whole dissembly appeared?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.
Which be the malefactors?
Marry, that am I and my partner.
Nay, that’s certain; we have the exhibition to examine.
But which are the offenders that are to be examined? Let them come before Master Constable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, marry, let them come before me.
What is your name, friend?
Borachio.
Pray, write down, “Borachio.”—Yours, sirrah?
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Write down “Master Gentleman Conrad.”—Masters, do you serve God?
Yea, sir, we hope.
Write down that they hope they serve God; and write God first, for God defend but God should go before such villains! —Masters, it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will go nearto be thought so shortly. How answer you for yourselves?
Marry, sir, we say we are none.
A marvelous witty fellow, I assure you, but I will go about with him.—Come you hither, sirrah, a word in your ear. Sir, I say to you it is thought you are false knaves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I say to you we are none.
Well, stand aside.—'Fore God, they are both in a ale. Have you writ down that they are none?
Master Constable, you go not the way to examine. You must call forth the watch that are their accusers.
Yea, marry, that’s the eftest way.—Let the watch come forth. Masters, I charge you in the Prince’s name, accuse these men.
This man said, sir, that Don John, the Prince’s brother, was a villain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince’s brother villain.
Master Constable—
Pray thee, fellow, peace. I do not like thy look, I promise thee.
[to Watch] What heard you him say else?
Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Flat burglary as ever was committed.
Yea, by Mass, that it is.
What else, fellow?
And that Count Claudio did mean upon his words to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
[to BORACHIO] O villain! Thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption for this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What else?
This is all.
And this is more, masters, than you can deny. Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away. Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this, suddenly died. —Master Constable,let these men be bound and brought to Leonato’s. I willgo before and show him their examination.
Come, let them be opinioned.
Let them be in the hands—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Off, coxcomb!
God’s my life, where’s the Sexton? Let him write down the Prince’s officer “coxcomb.” Come, bind them.—Thounaughty varlet!
Away! You are an ass, you are an ass!
Dost thou not suspect my place? Dost thou not suspect my years? Oh, that he were here to write me down an ass! But masters, remember that I am an ass, though it be not written down, yet forget not that I am an ass. —No, thou villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be provedupon thee by good witness. I am a wise fellow and, which is more, an officer and, which is more, a householder and, which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in Messina, and one that knows the law, go to, and a rich fellow enough, go to, and a fellow that hath had losses, and one that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him. —Bring him away.—Oh, that I had been writ down an ass!
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,And ’tis not wisdom thus to second griefAgainst yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray thee, cease thy counsel, Which falls into mine ears as profitless As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel, Nor let no comforter delight mine ear But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine. Bring me a father that so loved his child, Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine, And bid him speak of patience. Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, And let it answer every strain for strain, As thus for thus and such a grief for such, In every lineament, branch, shape, and form. If such a one will smile and stroke his beard, Bid sorrow wag, cry “hem” when he should groan, Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me And I of him will gather patience. But there is no such man. For, brother, men Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief Which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it, Their counsel turns to passion which before Would give preceptial med'cine to rage, Fetter strong madness in a silken thread, Charm ache with air, and agony with words. No, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience To those that wring under the load of sorrow, But no man's virtue nor sufficiency To be so moral when he shall endure The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel. My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee, peace. I will be flesh and blood, For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache patiently, However they have writ the style of gods And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself. Make those that do offend you suffer too.
There thou speak’st reason. Nay, I will do so. My soul doth tell me Hero is belied, And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince And all of them that thus dishonor her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
Good e'en, good e'en.
Good day to both of you.
Hear you, my lords—
We have some haste, Leonato.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some haste, my lord! Well, fare you well, my lord.Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
If he could right himself with quarreling,Some of us would lie low.
Who wrongs him?
Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou.Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword.I fear thee not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, beshrew my handIf it should give your age such cause of fear.In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me. I speak not like a dotard nor a fool, As under privilege of age to brag What I have done being young, or what would do Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head, Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me That I am forced to lay my reverence by, And with gray hairs and bruise of many days Do challenge thee to trial of a man. I say thou hast belied mine innocent child. Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart, And she lies buried with her ancestors, Oh, in a tomb where never scandal slept Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.
My villainy?
Thine, Claudio, thine, I say.
You say not right, old man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, my lord, I’ll prove it on his body if he dare, Despite his nice fence and his active practice, His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
Away! I will not have to do with you.
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast killed my child.If thou kill’st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed, But that’s no matter. Let him kill one first. Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.— Come, follow me, boy. Come, sir boy, come, follow me. Sir boy, I’ll whip you from your foining fence, Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Brother—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece, And she is dead, slandered to death by villains That dare as well answer a man indeed As I dare take a serpent by the tongue. — Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!
Brother Anthony—
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea, And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple — Scrambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys, That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander, Go anticly and show outward hideousness, And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst, And this is all.
But brother Anthony—
Come, ’tis no matter.Do not you meddle. Let me deal in this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience. My heart is sorry for your daughter’s death, But, on my honor, she was charged with nothing But what was true and very full of proof.
My lord, my lord—
I will not hear you.
No? Come, brother; away! I will be heard.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
Now, Signior, what news?
[to DON PEDRO] Good day, my lord.
Welcome, Signior. You are almost come to part almost a fray.
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Leonato and his brother. What think’st thou? Had we fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.
In a false quarrel there is no true valor. I came to seek you both.
We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high-proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy wit?
It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels:draw to pleasure us.
As I am an honest man, he looks pale.—Art thou sick, or angry?
[to BENEDICK] What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat? Thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, an you chargeit against me. I pray you, choose another subject.
[to DON PEDRO] Nay, then, give him another staff. This last was broke 'cross.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this light, he changes more and more. I think he be angry indeed.
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?
God bless me from a challenge!
[aside to CLAUDIO ] You are a villain. I jest not. I will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. Do me right, or I will protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear from you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
What, a feast, a feast?
I' faith, I thank him. He hath bid me to a calf’s headand a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my knife’s naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?
Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
I’ll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit he other day. I said thou hadst a fine wit. “True,” said she, “a fine little one.” “No,” said I, “a great wit.” “Right,” says she, “a great gross one.” “Nay,” said I, “a good wit.” “Just,” said she, “it hurts nobody.” “Nay,” said I, “the gentleman is wise.” “Certain,” said she, “a wisegentleman.” “Nay,” said I, “he hath the tongues.” “ThatI believe,” said she, “for he swore a thing to me on Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday morning; there’s a double tongue, there’s two tongues.” Thus did she an hour together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper’st man in Italy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.
Yea, that she did. But yet for all that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man’s daughter told us all.
All, all. And, moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.
But when shall we set the savage bull’s horns on the sensible Benedick’s head?
Yea, and text underneath: “Here dwells Benedick the married man?”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fare you well, boy. You know my mind. I will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. You break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, God be thanked, hurt not. —My lord, for your many courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your company. Your brother the Bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he and Ishall meet, and till then peace be with him.
He is in earnest.
In most profound earnest, and, I’ll warrant you, for the love of Beatrice.
And hath challenged thee?
Most sincerely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!
He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man.
But soft you, let me be. Pluck up, my heart, and be sad. Did he not say my brother was fled?
Come you, sir. If justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.
How now? Two of my brother’s men bound! Borachio one!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hearken after their offense, my lord.
Officers, what offense have these men done?
Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified unjust things; and, to conclude, they are lying knaves.
First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee what’s their offense; sixth and lastly, why they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and, by my troth, there’s one meaning well suited.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to BORACHIO and CONRAD ] Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be understood. What’s your offense?
Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. Do you hear me, and let this count kill me. I have deceivedeven your very eyes. What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, whoin the night overheard me confessing to this man how Don John your brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero’s garments, how you disgraced herwhen you should marry her. My villainy they have upon record, which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my master’s false accusation. And, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a villain.
[to CLAUDIO] Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.
[to BORACHIO] But did my brother set thee on to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.
He is composed and framed of treachery,And fled he is upon this villainy.
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appearIn the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And, masters, do not forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an ass.
Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,That, when I note another man like him, I may avoid him. Which of these is he?
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killedMine innocent child?
Yea, even I alone.
No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself. Here stand a pair of honorable men— A third is fled—that had a hand in it.— I thank you, princes, for my daughter’s death. Record it with your high and worthy deeds. 'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not how to pray your patience, Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself. Impose me to what penance your invention Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinned I not But in mistaking.
By my soul, nor I, And yet to satisfy this good old manI would bend under any heavy weightThat he’ll enjoin me to.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live— That were impossible —but, I pray you both, Possess the people in Messina here How innocent she died. And if your love Can labor ought in sad invention, Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb And sing it to her bones. Sing it tonight. Tomorrow morning come you to my house, And since you could not be my son-in-law, Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter, Almost the copy of my child that’s dead, And she alone is heir to both of us. Give her the right you should have given her cousin, And so dies my revenge.
O noble sir! Your overkindness doth wring tears from me. I do embrace your offer; and dispose For henceforth of poor Claudio.
Tomorrow then I will expect your coming. Tonight I take my leave. This naughty man Shall face to face be brought to Margaret, Who I believe was packed in all this wrong, Hired to it by your brother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, by my soul, she was not, Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me, But always hath been just and virtuous In any thing that I do know by her.
[to LEONATO ] Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass. I beseech you, let it be remembered in his punishment. And also the watch heard them talk of one Deformed. They say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it and borrows money in God’s name, the which he hath used so long and never paid that now men grow hard-hearted and will lend nothing for God’s sake. Pray you, examine him upon that point.
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth, and I praise God for you.
[giving him money] There’s for thy pains.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save the foundation!
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
I leave an arrant knave with your Worship, which I beseech your Worship to correct yourself, for the example of others. God keep your Worship! I wish your Worship well. God restore you to health! I humbly give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it!— Come, neighbor.
Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.
Farewell, my lords. We look for you tomorrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will not fail.
Tonight I’ll mourn with Hero.
[to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.—We’ll talk with Margaret,How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for in most comely truth thou deservest it.
To have no man come over me! Why, shall I always keep below stairs?
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound’s mouth; it catches.
And yours as blunt as the fencer’s foils, which hit buthurt not.
A most manly wit, Margaret, it will not hurt a woman. And so, I pray thee, call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
And therefore will come.
[sings] The god of love , That sits above , And knows me, and knows me , How pitiful I deserve — I mean in singing. But in loving, Leander the good swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole bookful of these quondam carpetmongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I cannot show it inrhyme. I have tried. I can find out no rhyme to “lady” but “baby”—an innocent rhyme; for “scorn,” “horn”—a hardrhyme; for, “school,” “fool”—a babbling rhyme; very ominous endings. No, I was not born under a rhyming planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?
Yea, Signior, and depart when you bid me.
Oh, stay but till then!
“Then” is spoken. Fare you well now. And yet, ere I go,let me go with that I came, which is, with knowing whathath passed between you and Claudio.
Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome. Therefore I will depart unkissed.
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
For them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?
Suffer love! A good epithet! I do suffer love indeed, for I love thee against my will.
In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor heart, if you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, forI will never love that which my friend hates.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
It appears not in this confession. There’s not one wiseman among twenty that will praise himself.
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in the time of good neighbors. If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live no longer inmonument than the bell rings and the widow weeps.
And how long is that, think you?
Question: why, an hour in clamor and a quarter in rheum. Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm, his conscience, find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. An now tell me, how doth your cousin?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very ill.
And how do you?
Very ill, too.
Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I leave you too, for here comes one in haste.
Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder’s old coil at home. It is proved my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused, the Prince and Claudio mightily abused,and Don John is the author of all, who is fled and gone. Will you come presently?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you go hear this news, Signior?
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buriedin thy eyes—and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle’s.
Is this the monument of Leonato?
It is, my lord.
[reading an epitaph] Done to death by slanderous tongues Was the Hero that here lies. Death, in guerdon of her wrongs, Gives her fame which never dies. So the life that died with shame Lives in death with glorious fame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang thou there upon the tomb, Praising her when I am dumb. Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. [sings] Pardon, goddess of the night , Those that slew thy virgin knight , For the which with songs of woe Round about her tomb they go . Midnight, assist our moan . Help us to sigh and groan Heavily, heavily . Graves, yawn and yield your dead , Till death be utterèd , Heavily, heavily . Now, unto thy bones good night! Yearly will I do this rite.
Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out. The wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day, Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey. Thanks to you all, and leave us. Fare you well.
Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds,And then to Leonato’s we will go.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed ’sThan this for whom we rendered up this woe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her Upon the error that you heard debated. But Margaret was in some fault for this, Although against her will, as it appears In the true course of all the question.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforcedTo call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all, Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, And when I send for you, come hither masked. The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour To visit me. —You know your office, brother. You must be father to your brother’s daughter, And give her to young Claudio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which I will do with confirmed countenance.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To do what, Signior?
To bind me or undo me, one of them.—Signior Leonato, truth it is, good Signior,Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.
That eye my daughter lent her; ’tis most true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I do with an eye of love requite her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,From Claudio and the Prince. But what’s your will?
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical. But for my will, my will is your goodwill May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined In the state of honorable marriage— In which, good Friar, I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking.
And my help.Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to this fair assembly.
Good morrow, Prince; good morrow, Claudio.We here attend you. Are you yet determinedToday to marry with my brother’s daughter?
I’ll hold my mind were she an Ethiope.
Call her forth, brother. Here’s the friar ready.
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what’s the matterThat you have such a February face,So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think he thinks upon the savage bull. Tush, fear not, man. We’ll tip thy horns with gold, And all Europa shall rejoice at thee As once Europa did at lusty Jove When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low, And some such strange bull leapt your father’s cow And got a calf in that same noble feat Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
For this I owe you. Here comes other reck'nings.
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I do give you her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then she’s mine.—Sweet, let me see your face.
No, that you shall not till you take her handBefore this friar and swear to marry her.
[to HERO] Give me your hand before this holy friar.I am your husband, if you like of me.
And when I lived, I was your other wife,And when you loved, you were my other husband. [she unmasks]
Another Hero!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing certainer.One Hero died defiled, but I do live,And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify When after that the holy rites are ended I’ll tell you largely of fair Hero’s death. Meantime let wonder seem familiar, And to the chapel let us presently.
Soft and fair, Friar.—Which is Beatrice?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][unmasking] I answer to that name. What is your will?
Do not you love me?
Why no, no more than reason.
Why then, your uncle and the Prince and ClaudioHave been deceived. They swore you did.
Do not you love me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Troth, no, no more than reason.
Why then, my cousin, Margaret, and UrsulaAre much deceived, for they did swear you did.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
And I’ll be sworn upon ’t that he loves her,For here’s a paper written in his hand,A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,Fashioned to Beatrice. [shows a paper]
And here’s another,Writ in my cousin’s hand, stol'n from her pocket, Containing her affection unto Benedick. [shows a paper]
A miracle! Here’s our own hands against our hearts. Come, I will have thee, but, by this light, I take thee for pity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would not deny you, but, by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life, forI was told you were in a consumption.
Peace! I will stop your mouth.
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?
I’ll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor. Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram? No. If a man will be beaten with brains, he shall wear nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me for what I have saidagainst it. For man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion. —For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruised, and love my cousin.
I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice, that I might have cudgeled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double-dealer, which out of question, thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look exceedingly narrowly to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come, we are friends. Let’s have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.
We’ll have dancing afterward.
First, of my word! Therefore play, music.—Prince, thou art sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife. There is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.
[to DON PEDRO] My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight And brought with armed men back to Messina.
[to DON PEDRO] Think not on him till tomorrow. I’ll devise thee brave punishments for him.—Strike up, pipers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush! Never tell me. I take it much unkindlyThat thou, Iago, who hast had my purseAs if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
'Sblood, but you’ll not hear me! If ever I did dream of such a matter, abhor me.
Thou told’st meThou didst hold him in thy hate.
Despise me If I do not. Three great ones of the city (In personal suit to make me his lieutenant) Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man I know my price, I am worth no worse a place. But he (as loving his own pride and purposes) Evades them with a bombast circumstance Horribly stuffed with epithets of war, And in conclusion Nonsuits my mediators. For “Certes,” says he, “I have already chose my officer.” And what was he? Forsooth, a great arithmetician, One Michael Cassio, a Florentine A fellow almost damned in a fair wife That never set a squadron in the field, Nor the division of a battle knows More than a spinster—unless the bookish theoric, Wherein the toged consuls can propose As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds Christian and heathen, must be belee’d and calmed By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster He (in good time) must his lieutenant be And I, bless the mark, his Moorship’s ancient.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, there’s no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service. Preferment goes by letter and affection, And not by old gradation, where each second Stood heir to th' first. Now sir, be judge yourself, Whether I in any just term am affined To love the Moor.
I would not follow him then.
O sir, content you. I follow him to serve my turn upon him. We cannot all be masters, nor all masters Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave That (doting on his own obsequious bondage) Wears out his time much like his master’s ass For naught but provender, and when he’s old, cashiered. Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves And, throwing but shows of service on their lords, Do well thrive by them. And when they have lined their coats, Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul, And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir, It is as sure as you are Roderigo, Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago. In following him, I follow but myself. Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, But seeming so, for my peculiar end. For when my outward action doth demonstrate The native act and figure of my heart In compliment extern, ’tis not long after But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
What a full fortune does the Thick-lips oweIf he can carry’t thus!
Call up her father. Rouse him. Make after him, Poison his delight, Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen, And, though he in a fertile climate dwell, Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy Yet throw such changes of vexation on’t, As it may lose some color.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is her father’s house, I’ll call aloud.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yellAs when, by night and negligence, the fireIs spied in populous cities.
What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!Thieves! thieves!
What is the reason of this terrible summons?What is the matter there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signior, is all your family within?
Are your doors locked?
Why, wherefore ask you this?
Zounds, sir, you’re robbed! For shame, put on your gown. Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul. Even now, now, very now, an old black ram Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise, Awake the snorting citizens with the bell Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. Arise, I say!
What, have you lost your wits?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
Not I. What are you?
My name is Roderigo.
The worser welcome. I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. In honest plainness thou hast heard me say My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness, Being full of supper and distempering drafts, Upon malicious knavery dost thou come To start my quiet?
Sir, sir, sir—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their powerTo make this bitter to thee.
Patience, good sir.
What tell’st thou me of robbing? This is Venice,My house is not a grange.
Most grave Brabantio,In simple and pure soul I come to you—
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians, you’ll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse. You’ll have your nephews neigh to you. You’ll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What profane wretch art thou?
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter andthe Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
Thou art a villain!
You are a senator!
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you, If’t be your pleasure and most wise consent (As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night Transported with no worse nor better guard But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor, If this be known to you and your allowance, We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. But if you know not this my manners tell me We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe That, from the sense of all civility, I thus would play and trifle with your reverence. Your daughter (if you have not given her leave) I say again, hath made a gross revolt, Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes In an extravagant and wheeling stranger Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself. If she be in her chamber or your house, Let loose on me the justice of the state For thus deluding you.
Strike on the tinder, ho! Give me a taper, call up all my people! This accident is not unlike my dream, Belief of it oppresses me already. Light, I say, light!
[to RODERIGO] Farewell, for I must leave you. It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, To be producted (as, if I stay, I shall) Against the Moor. For I do know the state (However this may gall him with some check) Cannot with safety cast him, for he’s embarked With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars (Which even now stand in act) that, for their souls, Another of his fathom they have none To lead their business. In which regard, Though I do hate him as I do hell pains, Yet for necessity of present life I must show out a flag and sign of love, (Which is indeed but sign). That you shall surely find him, Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search, And there will I be with him. So farewell.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is. And what’s to come of my despisèd time Is naught but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, Where didst thou see her?— Oh, unhappy girl!— With the Moor, say’st thou?—Who would be a father?— How didst thou know ’twas she?— Oh, she deceives me Past thought!—What said she to you?—Get more tapers, Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
Truly, I think they are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, heaven, how got she out? Oh, treason of the blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds By what you see them act. Is there not charms By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo, Of some such thing?
Yes, sir, I have indeed.
Call up my brother—Oh, would you had had her!Some one way, some another. Do you knowWhere we may apprehend her and the Moor?
I think I can discover him, if you please To get good guard and go along with me.
Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call. I may command at most.—Get weapons, ho! And raise some special officers of might.— On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Though in the trade of war I have slain men, Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th' conscience To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times I had thought t' have yerked him here under the ribs.
'Tis better as it is.
Nay, but he prated And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms Against your honor That, with the little godliness I have, I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir, Are you fast married? Be assured of this: That the Magnifico is much beloved And hath in his effect a voice potential As double as the Duke’s. He will divorce you, Or put upon you what restraint and grievance The law (with all his might to enforce it on) Will give him cable.
Let him do his spite. My services which I have done the signiory Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know— Which, when I know that boasting is an honor, I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being From men of royal siege, and my demerits May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune As this that I have reached. For know, Iago, But that I love the gentle Desdemona, I would not my unhousèd free condition Put into circumscription and confine For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come yond?
Those are the raisèd father and his friends.You were best go in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, I must be found.My parts, my title, and my perfect soulShall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
By Janus, I think no.
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? The goodness of the night upon you, friends!What is the news?
The Duke does greet you, general,And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,Even on the instant.
What’s the matter, think you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Something from Cyprus as I may divine. It is a business of some heat. The galleys Have sent a dozen sequent messengers This very night at one another’s heels, And many of the consuls, raised and met, Are at the Duke’s already. You have been hotly called for. When being not at your lodging to be found The Senate hath sent about three several guests To search you out.
'Tis well I am found by you.I will but spend a word here in the houseAnd go with you.
Ancient, what makes he here?
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.If it prove lawful prize, he’s made for ever.
I do not understand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’s married.
To who?
Marry, to—
Come, captain, will you go?
Have with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes another troop to seek for you.
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,He comes to bad intent.
Holla! Stand there!
Signior, it is the Moor.
Down with him, thief!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.Good signior, you shall more command with yearsThan with your weapons.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter? Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her! For I’ll refer me to all things of sense, If she in chains of magic were not bound, Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, So opposite to marriage that she shunned The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation, Would ever have, t' incur a general mock, Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight. Judge me the world if ’tis not gross in sense That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms, Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals That weakens motion. I’ll have ’t disputed on. 'Tis probable and palpable to thinking. I therefore apprehend and do attach thee For an abuser of the world, a practicer Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.— Lay hold upon him. If he do resist, Subdue him at his peril!
Hold your hands, Both you of my inclining and the rest. Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go To answer this your charge?
To prison, till fit timeOf law and course of direct sessionCall thee to answer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What if I do obey? How may the Duke be therewith satisfied, Whose messengers are here about my side Upon some present business of the state To bring me to him?
'Tis true, most worthy signior.The Duke’s in council and your noble self,I am sure, is sent for.
How? The Duke in council? In this time of the night? Bring him away. Mine’s not an idle cause. The Duke himself, Or any of my brothers of the state, Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own. For if such actions may have passage free, Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
There’s no composition in this newsThat gives them credit.
Indeed, they are disproportioned.My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And mine a hundred and forty.
And mine, two hundred. But though they jump not on a just account— As in these cases, where the aim reports 'Tis oft with difference—yet do they all confirm A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment. I do not so secure me in the error, But the main article I do approve In fearful sense.
[within] What, ho, what, ho, what, ho!
A messenger from the galleys.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, what’s the business?
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the stateBy Signior Angelo.
How say you by this change?
This cannot be, By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant, To keep us in false gaze. When we consider Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk, And let ourselves again but understand That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes So may he with more facile question bear it, For that it stands not in such warlike brace But altogether lacks th' abilities That Rhodes is dressed in. If we make thought of this We must not think the Turk is so unskillful To leave that latest which concerns him first, Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain To wake and wage a danger profitless.
Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is more news.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
Of thirty sail. And now they do re-stem Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano, Your trusty and most valiant servitor, With his free duty recommends you thus, And prays you to believe him.
'Tis certain then for Cyprus.Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’s now in Florence.
Write from us to him. Post-post-haste, dispatch.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you Against the general enemy Ottoman— [to BRABANTIO] I did not see you. Welcome, gentle signior. We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me. Neither my place nor aught I heard of business Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care Take hold on me, for my particular grief Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature That it engluts and swallows other sorrows And it is still itself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, what’s the matter?
My daughter! Oh, my daughter!
Dead?
Ay, to me. She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks. For nature so prepost'rously to err, Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, Sans witchcraft could not.
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself And you of her, the bloody book of law You shall yourself read in the bitter letter, After your own sense, yea, though our proper son Stood in your action.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Humbly I thank your grace. Here is the man, this Moor, whom now it seems, Your special mandate for the state affairs Hath hither brought.
We are very sorry for’t.
[to OTHELLO] What, in your own part, can you say to this?
Nothing, but this is so.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors, My very noble and approved good masters, That I have ta'en away this old man’s daughter, It is most true. True, I have married her. The very head and front of my offending Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech, And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace, For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used Their dearest action in the tented field, And little of this great world can I speak, More than pertains to feats of broils and battle, And therefore little shall I grace my cause In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience, I will a round unvarnished tale deliver Of my whole course of love. What drugs, what charms, What conjuration and what mighty magic— For such proceeding I am charged withal— I won his daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A maiden never bold, Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature, Of years, of country, credit, everything, To fall in love with what she feared to look on? It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect That will confess perfection so could err. Against all rules of nature, and must be driven To find out practices of cunning hell Why this should be. I therefore vouch again That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood Or with some dram, conjured to this effect, He wrought upon her.
To vouch this is no proof, Without more wider and more overt test Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
But, Othello, speak. Did you by indirect and forcèd courses Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections? Or came it by request and such fair question As soul to soul affordeth?
I do beseech you, Send for the lady to the Sagittary, And let her speak of me before her father. If you do find me foul in her report The trust, the office I do hold of you, Not only take away, but let your sentence Even fall upon my life.
Fetch Desdemona hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
And till she come, as truly as to heaven I do confess the vices of my blood So justly to your grave ears I’ll present How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love And she in mine.
Say it, Othello.
Her father loved me, oft invited me, Still questioned me the story of my life From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, That I have passed. I ran it through, even from my boyish days, To th' very moment that he bade me tell it, Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances, Of moving accidents by flood and field, Of hair-breadth ’scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach, Of being taken by the insolent foe And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence And portance in my traveler’s history. Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle, Rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven It was my hint to speak—such was my process— And of the Cannibals that each others eat, The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear Would Desdemona seriously incline. But still the house affairs would draw her hence, Which ever as she could with haste dispatch, She’d come again, and with a greedy ear Devour up my discourse, which I, observing, Took once a pliant hour and found good means To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart That I would all my pilgrimage dilate, Whereof by parcels she had something heard But not intentively. I did consent, And often did beguile her of her tears When I did speak of some distressful stroke That my youth suffered. My story being done She gave me for my pains a world of sighs. She swore, in faith, ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange, 'Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful. She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her, I should but teach him how to tell my story And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake. She loved me for the dangers I had passed, And I loved her that she did pity them. This only is the witchcraft I have used. Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.
I think this tale would win my daughter too. Good Brabantio. Take up this mangled matter at the best. Men do their broken weapons rather use Than their bare hands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you, hear her speak. If she confess that she was half the wooer, Destruction on my head if my bad blame Light on the man.— Come hither, gentle mistress. Do you perceive in all this noble company Where most you owe obedience?
My noble father, I do perceive here a divided duty. To you I am bound for life and education. My life and education both do learn me How to respect you. You are the lord of duty. I am hitherto your daughter. But here’s my husband. And so much duty as my mother showed To you, preferring you before her father, So much I challenge that I may profess Due to the Moor my lord.
God be with you. I have done. Please it your grace, on to the state affairs. I had rather to adopt a child than get it.— Come hither, Moor. I here do give thee that with all my heart Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel, I am glad at soul I have no other child. For thy escape would teach me tyranny, To hang clogs on them.— I have done, my lord.
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers Into your favor. When remedies are past, the griefs are ended By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended. To mourn a mischief that is past and gone Is the next way to draw new mischief on. What cannot be preserved when fortune takes, Patience her injury a mock'ry makes. The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief, He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile, We lose it not, so long as we can smile. He bears the sentence well that nothing bears But the free comfort which from thence he hears. But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow. These sentences to sugar or to gall, Being strong on both sides, are equivocal. But words are words. I never yet did hear That the bruised heart was piercèd through the ears. I humbly beseech you, proceed to th' affairs of state.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boist'rousexpedition.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators, Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize A natural and prompt alacrity I find in hardness, and do undertake These present wars against the Ottomites. Most humbly therefore bending to your state, I crave fit disposition for my wife. Due reference of place and exhibition, With such accommodation and besort As levels with her breeding.
Why, at her father’s.
I’ll not have it so.
Nor I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor would I there reside, To put my father in impatient thoughts By being in his eye. Most gracious Duke, To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear And let me find a charter in your voice, T' assist my simpleness.
What would you, Desdemona?
That I did love the Moor to live with him, My downright violence and storm of fortunes May trumpet to the world. My heart’s subdued Even to the very quality of my lord. I saw Othello’s visage in his mind, And to his honors and his valiant parts Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate. So that, dear lords, if I be left behind A moth of peace and he go to the war, The rites for which I love him are bereft me, And I a heavy interim shall support By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
Let her have your voice. Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not To please the palate of my appetite, Nor to comply with heat the young affects In my defunct and proper satisfaction, But to be free and bounteous to her mind, And heaven defend your good souls, that you think I will your serious and great business scant When she is with me. No, when light-winged toys Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness My speculative and officed instrument, That my disports corrupt and taint my business, Let housewives make a skillet of my helm And all indign and base adversities Make head against my estimation.
Be it as you shall privately determine, Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries hasteAnd speed must answer it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You must away tonight.
With all my heart.
At nine i' th' morning here we’ll meet again. Othello, leave some officer behind And he shall our commission bring to you, And such things else of quality and respect As doth import you.
So please your grace, my ancient. A man he is of honesty and trust. To his conveyance I assign my wife, With what else needful your good grace shall think To be sent after me.
Let it be so. Good night to every one.— [to BRABANTIO] And, noble signior, If virtue no delighted beauty lack, Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Adieu, brave Moor. Use Desdemona well.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.She has deceived her father, and may thee.
My life upon her faith!—Honest Iago, My Desdemona must I leave to thee. I prithee, let thy wife attend on her, And bring them after in the best advantage. Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour Of love, of worldly matter and direction, To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
Iago.
What say’st thou, noble heart?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What will I do, think’st thou?
Why, go to bed, and sleep.
I will incontinently drown myself.
If thou dost I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman!
It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixta benefit and an injury I never found man that knew howto love himself. Ere I would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I would change my humanitywith a baboon.
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our willsare gardeners. So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with many—either to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industry—why, the power and corrigible authority of thislies in our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbittedlusts. Whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.
It cannot be.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies! I have professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness. I could never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse. Follow thou the wars,defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her love to the Moor—put money in thy purse—nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration—put but money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their wills—fill thy purse with money. The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put money in thy purse. If thou wiltneeds damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and allthe tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her. Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! 'Tis clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be hanged in compassingthy joy than to be drowned and go without her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted. Thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, mea sport. There are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.
Where shall we meet i' th' morning?
At my lodging.
I’ll be with thee betimes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, farewell.Do you hear, Roderigo?
What say you?
No more of drowning, do you hear?
I am changed.
Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your purse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll sell all my land.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse. For I mine own gained knowledge should profane If I would time expend with such a snipe But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor, And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets He has done my office. I know not if ’t be true, But I, for mere suspicion in that kind, Will do as if for surety. He holds me well. The better shall my purpose work on him. Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now, To get his place and to plume up my will In double knavery. How? How? Let’s see. After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear That he is too familiar with his wife. He hath a person and a smooth dispose To be suspected, framed to make women false. The Moor is of a free and open nature That thinks men honest that but seem to be so, And will as tenderly be led by th' nose As asses are. I have ’t. It is engendered! Hell and night Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the mainDescry a sail.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land, A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements. If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A segregation of the Turkish fleet. For do but stand upon the foaming shore, The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds, The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, Seems to cast water on the burning bear, And quench the guards of th' ever-fixèd pole. I never did like molestation view On the enchafèd flood.
If that the Turkish fleetBe not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.It is impossible they bear it out.
News, lads, Our wars are done! The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks, That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance On most part of their fleet.
How? Is this true?
The ship is here put in, A Veronesa. Michael Cassio, Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello, Is come on shore. The Moor himself at sea And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad on ’t. 'Tis a worthy governor.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly And prays the Moor be safe. For they were parted With foul and violent tempest.
Pray heavens he be, For I have served him, and the man commands Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside, ho! As well to see the vessel that’s come in As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue An indistinct regard.
Come, let’s do so.For every minute is expectancyOf more arrivance.
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle That so approve the Moor. Oh, let the heavens Give him defense against the elements, For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is he well shipped?
His bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot Of very expert and approved allowance Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, Stand in bold cure.
[within] A sail, a sail, a sail!
What noise?
The town is empty. On the brow o' th' sea Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A sail!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My hopes do shape him for the governor.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.Our friends at least.
I pray you sir, go forthAnd give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.
I shall.
But good lieutenant, is your general wived?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid That paragons description and wild fame, One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, And in th' essential vesture of creation Does tire the ingener.
How now? Who has put in?
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
He’s had most favorable and happy speed. Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, The guttered rocks and congregated sands, Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel, As having sense of beauty, do omit Their mortal natures, letting go safely by The divine Desdemona.
What is she?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain, Left in the conduct of the bold Iago, Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts A se'nnight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard, And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath, That he may bless this bay with his tall ship, Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms, Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits And bring all Cyprus comfort!
Oh, behold, The riches of the ship is come on shore! You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees. Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven, Before, behind thee, and on every hand, Enwheel thee round!
I thank you, valiant Cassio.What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
He is not yet arrived. Nor know I aughtBut that he’s well and will be shortly here.
Oh, but I fear. How lost you company?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The great contention of the sea and skiesParted our fellowship—
[within] A sail, a sail!
But, hark! a sail.
They give this greeting to the citadel.This likewise is a friend.
See for the news.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good ancient, you are welcome.—Welcome, mistress. (kisses EMILIA) Let it not gall your patience, good Iago, That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lipsAs of her tongue she oft bestows on me, You would have have enough.
Alas, she has no speech!
In faith, too much. I find it still, when I have leave to sleep. Marry, before your ladyship, I grant, She puts her tongue a little in her heart And chides with thinking.
You have little cause to say so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come on, come on. You are pictures out of door, Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens, Saints in your injuries, devils being offended, Players in your housewifery, and hussies in your beds.
Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.You rise to play and go to bed to work.
You shall not write my praise.
No, let me not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wouldst thou write of me, if thou should’st praise me?
O gentle lady, do not put me to ’t,For I am nothing, if not critical.
Come on, assay. There’s one gone to the harbor?
Ay, madam.
I am not merry, but I do beguileThe thing I am by seeming otherwise.Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am about it, but indeed my invention Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze, It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors And thus she is delivered: If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit, The one’s for use, the other useth it.
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,She’ll find a white that shall her blackness fit.
Worse and worse!
How if fair and foolish?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She never yet was foolish that was fair,For even her folly helped her to an heir.
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' th' alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for herThat’s foul and foolish?
There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
Oh, heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?
She that was ever fair and never proud, Had tongue at will and yet was never loud, Never lacked gold and yet went never gay, Fled from her wish and yet said “Now I may,” She that being angered, her revenge being nigh, Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly, She that in wisdom never was so frail To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail, She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind, See suitors following and not look behind, She was a wight, if ever such wights were—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To do what?
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
Oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most profane and liberal counselor?
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.
( aside ) He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper! With as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do, I will gyve thee in thine own courtship. You say true, 'Tis so,indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are mostapt to play the sir in. Very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! ’tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster-pipes foryour sake!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Moor! I know his trumpet.
'Tis truly so.
Let’s meet him and receive him.
Lo, where he comes!
Oh my fair warrior!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My dear Othello!
It gives me wonder great as my content To see you here before me. Oh, my soul’s joy! If after every tempest come such calms, May the winds blow till they have wakened death, And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas Olympus-high, and duck again as low As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die, 'Twere now to be most happy, for I fear My soul hath her content so absolute That not another comfort like to this Succeeds in unknown fate.
The heavens forbidBut that our loves and comforts should increase,Even as our days do grow.
Amen to that, sweet powers! I cannot speak enough of this content. It stops me here, it is too much of joy. And this, and this, the greatest discords be (kissing her) That e'er our hearts shall make!
[aside] Oh, you are well tuned now,But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,As honest as I am.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, let us to the castle. News, friends! Our wars are done, the Turks are drowned. How does my old acquaintance of this isle?— Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus, I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet, I prattle out of fashion, and I dote In mine own comforts.— I prithee, good Iago, Go to the bay and disembark my coffers. Bring thou the master to the citadel. He is a good one, and his worthiness Does challenge much respect.— Come, Desdemona, Once more, well met at Cyprus.
(to the attendant) Do thou meet me presently at the harbor. (to RODERIGO) Come hither. If thou be’st valiant, as they say base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, list me. The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
With him? Why, ’tis not possible.
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor, butfor bragging and telling her fantastical lies. To love him still for prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she haveto look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties. All which the Moor is defective in. Now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will finditself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice. Now sir, this granted—as it is a most pregnant and unforced position—who stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no furtherconscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hidden loose affection. Why, none, why, none! A slipper and subtle knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. A devilish knave. Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.
I cannot believe that in her. She’s full of most blessed condition.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Blessed fig’s-end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?
Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.
Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue tothe history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so nearwith their lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! When these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from Venice.Watch you tonight for the command, I’ll lay ’t upon you. Cassio knows you not. I’ll not be far from you. Do you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister.
Well.
Sir, he’s rash and very sudden in choler, and haply maystrike at you. Provoke him that he may. For even out ofthat will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but bythe displanting of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
Adieu.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe ’t. That she loves him, ’tis apt and of great credit. The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not, Is of a constant, loving, noble nature, And I dare think he’ll prove to Desdemona A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too, Not out of absolute lust—though peradventure I stand accountant for as great a sin— But partly led to diet my revenge, For that I do suspect the lusty Moor Hath leaped into my seat. The thought whereof Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards, And nothing can or shall content my soul Till I am evened with him, wife for wife. Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor At least into a jealousy so strong That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do, If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace For his quick hunting, stand the putting on, I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip, Abuse him to the Moor in the right garb (For I fear Cassio with my night-cape too) Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me For making him egregiously an ass And practicing upon his peace and quiet Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused. Knavery’s plain face is never seen till used.
It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet, everyman put himself into triumph: some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and revels his addiction leads him. For besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices are open, andthere is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven. Bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.Let’s teach ourselves that honorable stopNot to outsport discretion.
Iago hath direction what to do, But notwithstanding with my personal eyeWill I look to ’t.
Iago is most honest. Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest Let me have speech with you.— Come, my dear love, The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue: That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you. Good night.
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
Not this hour, lieutenant, ’tis not yet ten o' the clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona—who let us not therefore blame. He hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sportfor Jove.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She’s a most exquisite lady.
And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.
Indeed she’s a most fresh and delicate creature.
What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
She is indeed perfection.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment.
Oh, they are our friends. But one cup. I’ll drink for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftilyqualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.
What, man, ’tis a night of revels! The gallants desire it.
Where are they?
Here at the door. I pray you call them in.
I’ll do ’t, but it dislikes me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I can fasten but one cup upon him, With that which he hath drunk tonight already, He’ll be as full of quarrel and offense As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo, Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out, To Desdemona hath tonight caroused Potations pottle-deep, and he’s to watch. Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits (That hold their honors in a wary distance, The very elements of this warlike isle) Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups, And they watch too. Now ’mongst this flock of drunkards Am I to put our Cassio in some action That may offend the isle. But here they come. If consequence do but approve my dream My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
'Fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.
Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, As I am a soldier.
Some wine, ho! (sings) And let me the cannikin clink, clink, And let me the cannikin clink. A soldier’s a man, A life’s but a span, Why then let a soldier drink. Some wine, boys!
Fore heaven, an excellent song.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander—Drink, ho!—are nothing to your English.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain. He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
To the health of our general!
I am for it, lieutenant, and I’ll do you justice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, sweet England! (sings) King Stephen was a worthy peer, His breeches cost him but a crown, He held them sixpence all too dear, With that he called the tailor lown. He was a wight of high renown, And thou art but of low degree, 'Tis pride that pulls the country down, Then take thine auld cloak about thee. Some wine, ho!
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
Will you hear ’t again?
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things. Well, heaven’s above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
It’s true, good lieutenant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of quality, I hope to be saved.
And so do I too, lieutenant.
Ay, but (by your leave) not before me. The lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Let’s have no more ofthis, let’s to our affairs.—Forgive us our sins!—Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
Excellent well!
Why, very well then. You must not think then that I am drunk.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To th' platform, masters. Come, let’s set the watch.
You see this fellow that is gone before, He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar And give direction. And do but see his vice, 'Tis to his virtue a just equinox, The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him. I fear the trust Othello puts him in On some odd time of his infirmity Will shake this island.
But is he often thus?
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.He’ll watch the horologe a double setIf drink rock not his cradle.
It were well The general were put in mind of it. Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] How now, Roderigo?I pray you, after the lieutenant, go!
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor Should hazard such a place as his own second With one of an ingraft infirmity. It were an honest action to say So to the Moor.
Not I, for this fair island.I do love Cassio well, and would do muchTo cure him of this evil—
But, hark! What noise?
Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s the matter, lieutenant?
A knave teach me my duty?I’ll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.
Beat me?
Dost thou prate, rogue? [strikes him]
Nay, good lieutenant! I pray you, sir, hold your hand. [stays him]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me go, sir, or I’ll knock you o'er the mazzard.
Come, come, you're drunk.
Drunk?
(aside to RODERIGO) Away, I say, go out, and cry a mutiny.
Nay, good lieutenant! Alas, gentlemen—Help, ho!— Lieutenant—sir, Montano—Help, masters!—Here’s a goodly watch indeed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s that which rings the bell?—Diablo, ho! The town will rise. Fie, Fie, lieutenant,You’ll be ashamed for ever.
What is the matter here?
I bleed still,I am hurt to the death. He dies!
Hold, for your lives!
Hold, ho! Lieutenant—sir, Montano—gentlemen, Have you forgot all place of sense and duty? Hold! The general speaks to you. Hold, for shame!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this? Are we turned Turks? And to ourselves do that Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites? For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl. He that stirs next to carve for his own rage Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion. Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?— Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving, Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now, In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom Divesting them for bed. And then, but now, As if some planet had unwitted men, Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breasts In opposition bloody. I cannot speak Any beginning to this peevish odds, And would in action glorious I had lost Those legs that brought me to a part of it.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil. The gravity and stillness of your youth The world hath noted, and your name is great In mouths of wisest censure. What’s the matter That you unlace your reputation thus And spend your rich opinion for the name Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger. Your officer Iago can inform you, While I spare speech, which something now offends me, Of all that I do know. Nor know I aught By me that’s said or done amiss this night, Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, And to defend ourselves it be a sin When violence assails us.
Now, by heaven, My blood begins my safer guides to rule, And passion, having my best judgment collied, Assays to lead the way. If I once stir, Or do but lift this arm, the best of you Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know How this foul rout began, who set it on, And he that is approved in this offence, Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth, Shall lose me. What, in a town of war Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear, To manage private and domestic quarrel? In night, and on the court and guard of safety? 'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began ’t?
If partially affined or leagued in officeThou dost deliver more or less than truthThou art no soldier.
Touch me not so near. I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio. Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general: Montano and myself being in speech, There comes a fellow crying out for help And Cassio following him with determined sword To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause, Myself the crying fellow did pursue, Lest by his clamor—as it so fell out— The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot, Outran my purpose, and I returned then rather For that I heard the clink and fall of swords And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight I ne'er might say before. When I came back— For this was brief— I found them close together At blow and thrust, even as again they were When you yourself did part them. More of this matter cannot I report. But men are men, the best sometimes forget. Though Cassio did some little wrong to him, As men in rage strike those that wish them best, Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received From him that fled some strange indignity Which patience could not pass.
I know, Iago, Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love theeBut never more be officer of mine.—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!I’ll make thee an example.
What’s the matter, dear?
All’s well, sweeting,Come away to bed.— [To MONTANO] Sir, for your hurtsMyself will be your surgeon. Lead him off.
Iago, look with care about the town And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.— Come, Desdemona, ’tis the soldiers' life To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, past all surgery.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, andwhat remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound. There is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving. You have lost no reputation at all unless yourepute yourself such a loser. What, man, there are waysto recover the general again. You are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue to him again and he’s yours.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk? And speak parrot? And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse fustian with one’s own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What was he that you followed with your sword? What hadhe done to you?
I know not.
Is ’t possible?
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. A quarrel, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! That we should, with joy, pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus recovered?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place tothe devil wrath. One unperfectness shows me another, tomake me frankly despise myself.
Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, I couldheartily wish this had not befallen. But since it is asit is, mend it for your own good.
I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a drunkard. Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, byand by a fool, and presently a beast! Oh, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used. Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I tell you what you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general. I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. Confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put you inyour place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested. This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming,this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it wasbefore.
You advise me well.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I amdesperate of my fortunes if they check me.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must tothe watch.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good night, honest Iago.
And what’s he then that says I play the villain? When this advice is free I give and honest, Probal to thinking and indeed the course To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue In any honest suit. She’s framed as fruitful As the free elements. And then for her To win the Moor, were to renounce his baptism, All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin, His soul is so enfettered to her love, That she may make, unmake, do what she list, Even as her appetite shall play the god With his weak function. How am I then a villain To counsel Cassio to this parallel course, Directly to his good? Divinity of hell! When devils will the blackest sins put on They do suggest at first with heavenly shows As I do now. For whiles this honest fool Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor, I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear: That she repeals him for her body’s lust. And by how much she strives to do him good She shall undo her credit with the Moor. So will I turn her virtue into pitch And out of her own goodness make the net That shall enmesh them all.
How now, Roderigo!
I do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almostspent, I have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I shall have so much experience for my pains. And so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice.
How poor are they that have not patience! What wound did ever heal but by degrees? Thou know’st we work by wit and not by witchcraft, And wit depends on dilatory time. Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee. And thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered Cassio. Though other things grow fair against the sun, Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe. Content thyself awhile. In troth, ’tis morning. Pleasure and action make the hours seem short. Retire thee, go where thou art billeted. Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter. Nay, get thee gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Two things are to be done: My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress. I’ll set her on. Myself, the while, to draw the Moor apart And bring him jump when he may Cassio find Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way. Dull not device by coldness and delay.
Masters, play here, I will content your pains.Something that’s brief, and bid “Good morrow, general.”
Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, thatthey speak i' th' nose thus?
How, sir? How?
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, marry, are they, sir.
Oh, thereby hangs a tail.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
Marry sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But,masters, here’s money for you, and the general so likesyour music that he desires you, for love’s sake, to make no more noise with it.
Well, sir, we will not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you have any music that may not be heard, to ’t again. But, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.
We have none such, sir.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away. Go, vanish into air, away!
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There’s a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the general’s wife be stirring, tell her there’s one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt thou do this?
She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto her.
In happy time, Iago.
You have not been abed, then?
Why, no. The day had broke Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago, To send in to your wife. My suit to her Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona Procure me some access.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll send her to you presently, And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor Out of the way, that your converse and business May be more free.
I humbly thank you for’t.
I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest.
Good morrow, good Lieutenant. I am sorry For your displeasure, but all will sure be well. The general and his wife are talking of it, And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loves you And needs no other suitor but his likings To take the safest occasion by the front To bring you in again.
Yet I beseech you, If you think fit, or that it may be done, Give me advantage of some brief discourse With Desdemona alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you come in.I will bestow you where you shall have timeTo speak your bosom freely.
I am much bound to you.
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot, And by him do my duties to the senate. That done, I will be walking on the works, Repair there to me.
Well, my good lord, I’ll do ’t.
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see ’t?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We’ll wait upon your lordship.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will doAll my abilities in thy behalf.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husbandAs if the cause were his.
Oh, that’s an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,But I will have my lord and you againAs friendly as you were.
Bounteous madam,Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,He’s never anything but your true servant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know ’t, I thank you. You do love my lord. You have known him long, and be you well assured He shall in strangeness stand no farther off Than in a polite distance.
Ay, but, lady, That policy may either last so long, Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, Or breed itself so out of circumstances, That, I being absent and my place supplied, My general will forget my love and service.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee, If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it To the last article. My lord shall never rest, I’ll watch him tame and talk him out of patience. His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift, I’ll intermingle everything he does With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio, For thy solicitor shall rather die Than give thy cause away.
Madam, here comes my lord.
Madam, I’ll take my leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, stay and hear me speak.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,Unfit for mine own purposes.
Well, do your discretion.
Ha! I like not that.
What dost thou say?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing, my lord, or if—I know not what.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think itThat he would steal away so guilty-likeSeeing you coming.
I do believe ’twas he.
How now, my lord?I have been talking with a suitor here,A man that languishes in your displeasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is ’t you mean?
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord, If I have any grace or power to move you His present reconciliation take. For if he be not one that truly loves you, That errs in ignorance and not in cunning, I have no judgment in an honest face. I prithee, call him back.
Went he hence now?
Ay, sooth, so humbledThat he hath left part of his grief with me To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
Not now, sweet Desdemona. Some other time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But shall ’t be shortly?
The sooner, sweet, for you.
Shall ’t be tonight at supper?
No, not tonight.
Tomorrow dinner, then?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall not dine at home, I meet the captains at the citadel.
Why, then, tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn. On Tuesday noon, or night, or Wednesday morn. I prithee name the time, but let it not Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent, And yet his trespass, in our common reason (Save that, they say, the wars must make example Out of her best) is not, almost, a fault T' incur a private check. When shall he come? Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul What you would ask me that I should deny Or stand so mamm'ring on. What? Michael Cassio That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time, When I have spoke of you dispraisingly, Hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much—
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will,I will deny thee nothing.
Why, this is not a boon, 'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves, Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed It shall be full of poise and difficult weight And fearful to be granted.
I will deny thee nothing! Whereon I do beseech thee, grant me this,To leave me but a little to myself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
Farewell, my Desdemona. I’ll come to thee straight.
Emilia, come.—Be as your fancies teach you. Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soulBut I do love thee! And when I love thee notChaos is come again.
My noble lord—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What dost thou say, Iago?
Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady,Know of your love?
He did, from first to last.Why dost thou ask?
But for a satisfaction of my thought,No further harm.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
Oh, yes, and went between us very oft.
Indeed?
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern’st thou aught in that? Is he not honest?
Honest, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Honest, ay, honest.
My lord, for aught I know.
What dost thou think?
Think, my lord?
“Think, my lord?” Alas, thou echo’st me As if there were some monster in thy thought Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something. I heard thee say even now thou lik’st not that When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like? And when I told thee he was of my counsel Of my whole course of wooing, thou cried’st “Indeed?” And didst contract and purse thy brow together As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me Show me thy thought.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, you know I love you.
I think thou dost. And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath, Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more. For such things in a false disloyal knave Are tricks of custom, but in a man that’s just They are close dilations, working from the heart, That passion cannot rule.
For Michael Cassio, I dare be sworn, I think, that he is honest.
I think so too.
Men should be what they seem,Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Certain, men should be what they seem.
Why then I think Cassio’s an honest man.
Nay, yet there’s more in this. I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts The worst of words.
Good my lord, pardon me, Though I am bound to every act of duty I am not bound to that all slaves are free to. Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false, As where’s that palace whereinto foul things Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so pure Wherein uncleanly apprehensions Keep leets and law-days and in sessions sit With meditations lawful?
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,If thou but think’st him wronged and mak’st his earA stranger to thy thoughts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech you, Though I perchance am vicious in my guess, As, I confess, it is my nature’s plague To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy Shapes faults that are not, that your wisdom, From one that so imperfectly conceits, Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble Out of his scattering and unsure observance. It were not for your quiet nor your good, Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom To let you know my thoughts.
What dost thou mean?
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls. Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something, nothing: 'Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands. But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed.
I’ll know thy thoughts.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha!
Oh, beware, my lord, of jealousy! It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger, But, oh, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er Who dotes, yet doubts— suspects, yet soundly loves!
Oh, misery!
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough, But riches fineless is as poor as winter To him that ever fears he shall be poor. Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend From jealousy!
Why, why is this? Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy, To follow still the changes of the moon With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt Is to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat When I shall turn the business of my soul To such exsufflicate and blowed surmises, Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances. Where virtue is, these are more virtuous. Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt, For she had eyes and chose me. No, Iago, I’ll see before I doubt, when I doubt, prove, And on the proof there is no more but this: Away at once with love or jealousy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason To show the love and duty that I bear you With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound, Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof. Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio. Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure. I would not have your free and noble nature Out of self-bounty be abused. Look to ’t. I know our country disposition well. In Venice they do let God see the pranks They dare not show their husbands. Their best conscience Is not to leave ’t undone, but keep’t unknown.
Dost thou say so?
She did deceive her father, marrying you,And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,She loved them most.
And so she did.
Why, go to then. She that, so young, could give out such a seeming, To seel her father’s eyes up close as oak, He thought ’twas witchcraft. But I am much to blame. I humbly do beseech you of your pardon For too much loving you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am bound to thee forever.
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
Not a jot, not a jot.
Trust me, I fear it has. I hope you will consider what is spoke Comes from my love. But I do see you’re moved. I am to pray you not to strain my speech To grosser issues nor to larger reach Than to suspicion.
I will not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Should you do so, my lord, My speech should fall into such vile success Which my thoughts aimed not at. Cassio’s my worthy friend— My lord, I see you’re moved.
No, not much moved. I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.
Long live she so. And long live you to think so.
And yet how nature, erring from itself—
Ay, there’s the point. As, to be bold with you, Not to affect many proposèd matches Of her own clime, complexion, and degree, Whereto we see in all things nature tends— Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank, Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural. But—pardon me— I do not in position Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear Her will, recoiling to her better judgment, May fall to match you with her country forms, And happily repent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, farewell.If more thou dost perceive, let me know more. Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
My lord, I take my leave. [going]
[aside] Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtlessSees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
(returns) My lord, I would I might entreat your honor To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time. Although ’tis fit that Cassio have his place, For sure, he fills it up with great ability, Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, You shall by that perceive him and his means. Note if your lady strain his entertainment With any strong or vehement importunity. Much will be seen in that. In the meantime, Let me be thought too busy in my fears— As worthy cause I have to fear I am— And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.
Fear not my government.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I once more take my leave.
This fellow’s of exceeding honesty And knows all quantities, with a learnèd spirit, Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard, Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, I’d whistle her off and let her down the wind To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black And have not those soft parts of conversation That chamberers have, or for I am declined Into the vale of years—yet that’s not much— She’s gone, I am abused, and my relief Must be to loathe her. Oh, curse of marriage That we can call these delicate creatures ours And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad And live upon the vapor of a dungeon Than keep a corner in the thing I love For others' uses. Yet ’tis the plague to great ones, Prerogatived are they less than the base. 'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death. Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us When we do quicken. Look where she comes.
If she be false, heaven mocked itself.I’ll not believe ’t.
How now, my dear Othello?Your dinner, and the generous islanders By you invited, do attend your presence.
I am to blame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why do you speak so faintly?Are you not well?
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
Why that’s with watching, ’twill away again. Let me but bind it hard, within this hourIt will be well. [pulls out a handkerchief]
Your napkin is too little,Let it alone.
Come, I’ll go in with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am very sorry that you are not well.
(picks up the handkerchief) I am glad I have found this napkin, This was her first remembrance from the Moor. My wayward husband hath a hundred times Wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token (For he conjured her she should ever keep it) That she reserves it evermore about her To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta'en out And give ’t Iago. What he will do with it Heaven knows, not I. I nothing but to please his fantasy.
How now! What do you here alone?
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.
A thing for me? It is a common thing—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha?
To have a foolish wife.
Oh, is that all? What will you give me now For the same handkerchief?
What handkerchief?
What handkerchief?Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,That which so often you did bid me steal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hast stolen it from her?
No, but she let it drop by negligenceAnd, to th' advantage, I being here, took ’t up.Look, here it is.
A good wench, give it me.
What will you do with ’t, that you have been so earnestTo have me filch it?
Why, what is that to you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it be not for some purpose of import,Give ’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run madWhen she shall lack it.
Be not acknown on ’t,I have use for it. Go, leave me.
I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin And let him find it. Trifles light as air Are to the jealous confirmations strong As proofs of holy writ. This may do something. The Moor already changes with my poison. Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons Which at the first are scarce found to distaste, But with a little act upon the blood Burn like the mines of sulfur.
I did say so. Look, where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep Which thou owedst yesterday.
Ha! Ha! False to me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, general? No more of that.
Avaunt! Be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.I swear ’tis better to be much abusedThan but to know ’t a little.
How now, my lord!
What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust? I saw ’t not, thought it not, it harmed not me. I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and merry. I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips. He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n, Let him not know’t, and he’s not robbed at all.
I am sorry to hear this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I had been happy if the general camp, Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body, So I had nothing known. Oh, now forever Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content! Farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars That makes ambition virtue! Oh, farewell! Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife, The royal banner, and all quality, Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats The immortal Jove’s dead clamors counterfeit, Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone.
Is ’t possible, my lord?
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore, Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof Or by the worth of mine eternal soul Thou hadst been better have been born a dog Than answer my waked wrath!
Is ’t come to this?
Make me to see ’t, or at the least so prove it That the probation bear no hinge nor loopTo hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My noble lord—
If thou dost slander her and torture me, Never pray more. Abandon all remorse. On horror’s head horrors accumulate, Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed, For nothing canst thou to damnation add Greater than that.
Oh, grace! Oh, heaven forgive me! Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense? God buy you, take mine office. O wretched fool That lov’st to make thine honesty a vice! O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world, To be direct and honest is not safe. I thank you for this profit, and from hence I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.
I should be wise, for honesty’s a foolAnd loses that it works for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the world, I think my wife be honest and think she is not. I think that thou art just and think thou art not. I’ll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh As Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and black As mine own face. If there be cords or knives, Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams, I’ll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion.I do repent me that I put it to you.You would be satisfied?
Would? Nay, and I will.
And may, but how? How satisfied, my lord? Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,Behold her topped?
Death and damnation! Oh!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It were a tedious difficulty, I think, To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then, If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster More than their own! What then? How then? What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction? It is impossible you should see this, Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say, If imputation and strong circumstances Which lead directly to the door of truth Will give you satisfaction, you may have ’t.
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.
I do not like the office. But, sith I am entered in this cause so far, Pricked to ’t by foolish honesty and love, I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately And, being troubled with a raging tooth, I could not sleep. There are a kind of men So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter Their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio. In sleep I heard him say “Sweet Desdemona, Let us be wary, let us hide our loves.” And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand, Cry “O sweet creature!” and then kiss me hard, As if he plucked up kisses by the roots That grew upon my lips, lay his leg Over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then Cry “Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!”
Oh, monstrous! Monstrous!
Nay, this was but his dream.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. And this may help to thicken other proofsThat do demonstrate thinly.
I’ll tear her all to pieces!
Nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done, She may be honest yet. Tell me but this, Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?
I gave her such a one, ’twas my first gift.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not that, but such a handkerchief—I am sure it was your wife’s—did I todaySee Cassio wipe his beard with.
If it be that—
If it be that, or any that was hers,It speaks against her with the other proofs.
Oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives! One is too poor, too weak for my revenge. Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago, All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven—'tis gone. Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell! Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught, For ’tis of aspics' tongues!
Yet be content.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, blood, blood, blood!
Patience, I say. Your mind may change.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic sea, Whose icy current and compulsive course Ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on To the Propontic and the Hellespont, Even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love Till that a capable and wide revenge Swallow them up. Now, by yon marble heaven, In the due reverence of a sacred vow I here engage my words. (he kneels)
Do not rise yet. Witness, you ever-burning lights above, You elements that clip us round about, Witness that here Iago doth give up The execution of his wit, hands, heart, To wronged Othello’s service. Let him command, And to obey shall be in me remorse, What bloody business ever.
I greet thy love Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous, And will upon the instant put thee to ’t. Within these three days let me hear thee say That Cassio’s not alive.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My friend is dead,'Tis done at your request. But let her live.
Damn her, lewd minx! Oh, damn her, damn her! Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw To furnish me with some swift means of death For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
I am your own for ever.
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
I dare not say he lies anywhere.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, man?
He’s a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, ’tis stabbing.
Go to. Where lodges he?
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.
Can anything be made of this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.
Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved mylord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
I know not, madam.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor Is true of mind and made of no such baseness As jealous creatures are, it were enough To put him to ill thinking.
Is he not jealous?
Who, he? I think the sun where he was bornDrew all such humors from him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look where he comes.
I will not leave him now till CassioBe called to him.—How is ’t with you, my lord?
Well, my good lady.— [aside] Oh, hardness to dissemble!—How do you, Desdemona?
Well, my good lord.
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart. Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer, Much castigation, exercise devout, For here’s a young and sweating devil here, That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand, A frank one.
You may indeed say so,For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands, But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What promise, chuck?
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.Lend me thy handkerchief.
Here, my lord.
That which I gave you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have it not about me.
Not?
No, indeed, my lord.
That’s a fault. That handkerchief Did an Egyptian to my mother give, She was a charmer and could almost read The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it 'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father Entirely to her love, but if she lost it Or made gift of it, my father’s eye Should hold her loathèd and his spirits should hunt After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me And bid me, when my fate would have me wived, To give it her. I did so, and take heed on ’t, Make it a darling like your precious eye. To lose ’t or give ’t away were such perdition As nothing else could match.
Is ’t possible?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis true. There’s magic in the web of it. A sibyl, that had numbered in the world The sun to course two hundred compasses, In her prophetic fury sewed the work. The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk, And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful Conserved of maidens' hearts.
Indeed? Is ’t true?
Most veritable, therefore look to ’t well.
Then would to Heaven that I had never seen ’t!
Ha! Wherefore?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Is ’t lost? Is ’t gone? Speak, is ’t out o' th' way?
Bless us!
Say you?
It is not lost, but what and if it were?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How!
I say, it is not lost.
Fetch ’t, let me see ’t.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now. This is a trick to put me from my suit. Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Fetch me the handkerchief—my mind misgives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come,You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.
The handkerchief!
A man that all his timeHath founded his good fortunes on your love,Shared dangers with you—
The handkerchief!
In sooth, you are to blame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Zounds!
Is not this man jealous?
I ne'er saw this before.Sure, there’s some wonder in this handkerchief,I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man. They are all but stomachs, and we all but food. To eat us hungerly, and when they are full, They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
There is no other way. 'Tis she must do ’t,And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you That by your virtuous means I may again Exist, and be a member of his love Whom I, with all the office of my heart Entirely honor. I would not be delayed. If my offence be of such mortal kind That nor my service past, nor present sorrows, Nor purposed merit in futurity, Can ransom me into his love again, But to know so must be my benefit. So shall I clothe me in a forced content, And shut myself up in some other course, To fortune’s alms.
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio, My advocation is not now in tune. My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him Were he in favor as in humor altered. So help me every spirit sanctified As I have spoken for you all my best And stood within the blank of his displeasure For my free speech. You must awhile be patient. What I can do I will, and more I will Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
Is my lord angry?
He went hence but now,And certainly in strange unquietness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon When it hath blown his ranks into the air And, like the devil, from his very arm Puffed his own brother— and is he angry? Something of moment then, I will go meet him. There’s matter in ’t indeed, if he be angry.
I prithee, do so.
Something, sure, of state, Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him, Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things, Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so, For let our finger ache and it endues Our other healthful members even to that sense Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods, Nor of them look for such observances As fit the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia, I was, unhandsome warrior as I am, Arraigning his unkindness with my soul, But now I find I had suborned the witness, And he’s indicted falsely.
Pray heaven it beState matters, as you think, and no conceptionNor no jealous toy concerning you.
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But jealous souls will not be answered so. They are not ever jealous for the cause, But jealous for they’re jealous. It is a monster Begot upon itself, born on itself.
Heaven keep the monster from Othello’s mind!
Lady, amen.
I will go seek him.—Cassio, walk hereabout. If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
I humbly thank your ladyship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Save you, friend Cassio!
What make you from home? How is ’t with you, my most fair Bianca?Indeed, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio. What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights? Eight score eight hours? And lovers' absent hours More tedious than the dial eightscore times! Oh weary reckoning!
Pardon me, Bianca, I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed, But I shall, in a more continuate time, Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, (giving her DESDEMONA’s handkerchief) Take me this work out.
O Cassio, whence came this? This is some token from a newer friend! To the felt absence now I feel a cause. Is ’t come to this? Well, well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to, woman, Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth From whence you have them. You are jealous now That this is from some mistress, some remembrance. No, in good troth, Bianca.
Why, whose is it?
I know not neither, I found it in my chamber. I like the work well. Ere it be demanded, As like enough it will, I would have it copied. Take it and do ’t, and leave me for this time.
Leave you! Wherefore?
I do attend here on the generalAnd think it no addition, nor my wish,To have him see me womaned.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, I pray you?
Not that I love you not.
But that you do not love me.I pray you bring me on the way a littleAnd say if I shall see you soon at night.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here. But I’ll see you soon.
'Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you think so?
Think so, Iago?
What,To kiss in private?
An unauthorized kiss!
Or to be naked with her friend in bedAn hour or more, not meaning any harm?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm! It is hypocrisy against the devil. They that mean virtuously, and yet do so, The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
So they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip. But if I give my wife a handkerchief—
What then?
Why then ’tis hers, my lord, and, being hers,She may, I think, bestow ’t on any man.
She is protectress of her honor too. May she give that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her honor is an essence that’s not seen,They have it very oft that have it not.But for the handkerchief—
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it. Thou saidst—Oh, it comes o'er my memory, As doth the raven o'er the infectious house, Boding to all—he had my handkerchief.
Ay, what of that?
That’s not so good now.
What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong? Or heard him say—as knaves be such abroad, Who having, by their own importunate suit, Or voluntary dotage of some mistress, Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose But they must blab—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hath he said any thing?
He hath, my lord, but be you well assuredNo more than he’ll unswear.
What hath he said?
Why, that he did—I know not what he did.
What? what?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lie—
With her?
With her, on her, what you will.
Lie with her? lie on her? We say “lie on her” when theybelie her! Lie with her—that’s fulsome. Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief! To confess, and be hanged for his labor. First to be hanged, and then toconfess—I tremble at it . Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is ’t possible? Confess!—Handkerchief!—Oh, devil!—
Work on, My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught, And many worthy and chaste dames even thus, All guiltless, meet reproach.— What, ho! My lord! My lord, I say! Othello!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Cassio!
What’s the matter?
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples.
No, forbear. The lethargy must have his quiet course. If not, he foams at mouth and by and by Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs. Do you withdraw yourself a little while, He will recover straight. When he is gone I would on great occasion speak with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
Dost thou mock me?
I mock you not, by heaven.Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast.
There’s many a beast then in a populous city,And many a civil monster.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did he confess it?
Good sir, be a man, Think every bearded fellow that’s but yoked May draw with you. There’s millions now alive That nightly lie in those unproper beds Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better. Oh, ’tis the spite of hell, the fiend’s arch-mock, To lip a wanton in a secure couch, And to suppose her chaste. No, let me know, And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Oh, thou art wise! 'Tis certain.
Stand you awhile apart, Confine yourself but in a patient list. Whilst you were here o'erwhelmèd with your grief— A passion most resulting such a man— Cassio came hither. I shifted him away And laid good ’scuses upon your ecstasy, Bade him anon return and here speak with me, The which he promised. Do but encave yourself, And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns That dwell in every region of his face. For I will make him tell the tale anew Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when He hath, and is again to cope your wife. I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience, Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen, And nothing of a man.
Dost thou hear, Iago?I will be found most cunning in my patience,But—dost thou hear?—most bloody.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s not amiss, But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca, A huswife that by selling her desires Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature That dotes on Cassio, as ’tis the strumpet’s plague To beguile many and be beguiled by one. He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad. And his unbookish jealousy must construe Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behavior Quite in the wrong.— How do you now, lieutenant?
The worser that you give me the additionWhose want even kills me.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on ’t. Now if this suit lay in Bianca’s powerHow quickly should you speed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, poor caitiff!
Look how he laughs already!
I never knew woman love man so.
Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed she loves me.
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you hear, Cassio?
Now he importunes himTo tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.Do you intend it?
Ha, ha, ha!
Do ye triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I marry her! What? A customer? Prithee bear some charity to my wit. Do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!
So, so, so, so! They laugh that win!
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
Prithee say true!
I am a very villain else.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have you scored me? Well.
This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is persuaded Iwill marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.
She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck—
Crying “O dear Cassio!” as it were. His gesture importsit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! Ha, ha, ha!
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. Oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.
Well, I must leave her company.
Before me! Look, where she comes.
'Tis such another fitchew. Marry, a perfumed one.—What do you mean by this haunting of me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the work? A likelypiece of work, that you should find it in your chamber,and not know who left it there! This is some minx’s token, and I must take out the work? There, give it yourhobby-horse. Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on ’t.
How now, my sweet Bianca! How now, how now?
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when you are next prepared for.
After her, after her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must, she’ll rail in the street else.
Will you sup there?
Yes, I intend so.
Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.
Prithee come, will you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go to! Say no more.
[advancing] How shall I murder him, Iago?
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
Oh Iago!
And did you see the handkerchief?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was that mine?
Yours by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman! A fair woman! A sweet woman!
Nay, you must forget that.
Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone. I strike it and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world hath not asweeter creature, she might lie by an emperor’s side and command him tasks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, that’s not your way.
Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. Oh, she will sing thesavageness out of a bear! Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
She’s the worse for all this.
Oh, a thousand thousand times—and then of so gentle a condition!
Ay, too gentle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.
I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?
Oh, ’tis foul in her.
With mine officer!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s fouler.
Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I’ll not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovidemy mind again—This night, Iago!
Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.
Good, good, the justice of it pleases! Very good!
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by midnight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Excellent good.
What trumpet is that same?
I warrant something from Venice. 'Tis Lodovico, this, comes from the duke. See, your wife’s with him.
Save you, worthy general!
With all my heart, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?
I am very glad to see you, signior. Welcome to Cyprus.
I thank you. How does lieutenant Cassio?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lives, sir.
Cousin, there’s fall'n between him and my lordAn unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
Are you sure of that?
My lord?
[reads] “This fail you not to do, as you will—”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He did not call, he’s busy in the paper.Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?
A most unhappy one. I would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
Fire and brimstone!
My lord?
Are you wise?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, is he angry?
Maybe the letter moved him,For, as I think, they do command him home,Deputing Cassio in his government.
By my troth, I am glad on ’t.
Indeed!
My lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad to see you mad.
Why, sweet Othello—
Devil! [strikes her]
I have not deserved this.
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,Though I should swear I saw ’t. 'Tis very much.Make her amends, she weeps.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, devil, devil! If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears, Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile. Out of my sight!
I will not stay to offend you.
Truly, an obedient lady.I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
Mistress!
My lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would you with her, sir?
Who, I, my lord?
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn. Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on, And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep. And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient, Very obedient. (To DESDEMONA) Proceed you in your tears. (To LODOVICO) Concerning this, sir— (To DESDEMONA) Oh,well-painted passion! (To LODOVICO) I am commanded home. (To DESDEMONA) Get you away, I’ll send for you anon. (To LODOVICO) Sir, I obey the mandate And will return to Venice. (To DESDEMONA) Hence, avaunt!
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonightI do entreat that we may sup together. You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature Whom passion could not shake? Whose solid virtue The shot of accident nor dart of chance Could neither graze nor pierce?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is much changed.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
He’s that he is. I may not breathe my censureWhat he might be. If what he might he is not,I would to heaven he were!
What? Strike his wife?
'Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knewThat stroke would prove the worst!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it his use?Or did the letters work upon his bloodAnd new-create his fault?
Alas, alas! It is not honesty in me to speak What I have seen and known. You shall observe him, And his own courses will denote him so That I may save my speech. Do but go after And mark how he continues.
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
You have seen nothing then?
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them.
What, did they never whisper?
Never, my lord.
Nor send you out o' th' way?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
Never, my lord.
That’s strange.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom. If any wretch have put this in your head Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse For if she be not honest, chaste, and true There’s no man happy. The purest of their wives Is foul as slander.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bid her come hither. Go.
She says enough, yet she’s a simple bawd That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore, A closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets. And yet she’ll kneel and pray, I have seen her do ’t.
My lord, what is your will?
Pray you, chuck, come hither.
What is your pleasure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me see your eyes.Look in my face.
What horrible fancy’s this?
(to EMILIA) Some of your function, mistress, Leave procreants alone and shut the door. Cough or cry “hem” if any body come. Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch!
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import?I understand a fury in your words,But not the words.
Why, what art thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your wife, my lord. Your true and loyal wife.
Come, swear it, damn thyself. Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double damned, Swear thou art honest!
Heaven doth truly know it.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, Desdemona, away, away, away!
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep? Am I the motive of these tears, my lord? If haply you my father do suspect An instrument of this your calling back, Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him, Why, I have lost him too.
Had it pleased heaven To try me with affliction, had they rained All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, Steeped me in poverty to the very lips, Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, I should have found in some place of my soul A drop of patience. But, alas, to make me The fixèd figure for the time of scorn To point his slow and moving finger at! Yet could I bear that too, well, very well. But there where I have garnered up my heart, Where either I must live or bear no life, The fountain from the which my current runs Or else dries up—to be discarded thence! Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there, Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,— Ay, there, look grim as hell!
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
Oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles, That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed, Who art so lovely fair and smell’st so sweet That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book, Made to write “whore” upon? What committed? Committed? O thou public commoner! I should make very forges of my cheeks That would to cinders burn up modesty Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed? Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks, The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth And will not hear ’t. What committed! Impudent strumpet!
By heaven, you do me wrong!
Are you not a strumpet?
No, as I am a Christian. If to preserve this vessel for my lord From any other foul unlawful touch Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, not a whore?
No, as I shall be saved.
Is ’t possible?
Oh, heaven forgive us!
I cry you mercy, then, I took you for that cunning whore of Venice That married with Othello.— You, mistress, That have the office opposite to Saint Peter And keep the gate of hell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You, you, ay, you!We have done our course. There’s money for your pains.I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
Faith, half asleep.
Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?
With who?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, with my lord, madam.
Who is thy lord?
He that is yours, sweet lady.
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia. I cannot weep, nor answers have I none, But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember, And call thy husband hither.
Here’s a change indeed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet. How have I been behaved that he might stick The small’st opinion on my least misuse?
What is your pleasure, madam? How is ’t with you?
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes Do it with gentle means and easy tasks. He might have chid me so, for, in good faith, I am a child to chiding.
What is the matter, lady?
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, That true hearts cannot bear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Am I that name, Iago?
What name, fair lady?
Such as she says my lord did say I was.
He called her “whore.” A beggar in his drink Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
Why did he so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not know. I am sure I am none such.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Hath she forsook so many noble matches, Her father and her country, and her friends, To be called “whore”? Would it not make one weep?
It is my wretched fortune.
Beshrew him for ’t!How comes this trick upon him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, heaven doth know.
I will be hanged, if some eternal villain, Some busy and insinuating rogue, Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else!
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
A halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones! Why should he call her “whore?” Who keeps her company? What place? What time? What form? What likelihood? The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave, Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. O heavens, that such companions thou’dst unfold, And put in every honest hand a whip To lash the rascals naked through the world Even from the east to th' west!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speak within door.
Oh, fie upon them! Some such squire he was That turned your wit the seamy side withoutAnd made you to suspect me with the Moor.
You are a fool. Go to.
Alas Iago, What shall I do to win my lord again? Good friend, go to him. For, by this light of heaven, I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel: If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love, Either in discourse of thought or actual deed, Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense, Delighted them, or any other form, Or that I do not yet, and ever did, And ever will— though he do shake me off To beggarly divorcement—love him dearly, Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much, And his unkindness may defeat my life, But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore,” It does abhor me now I speak the word. To do the act that might the addition earn Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.
I pray you, be content, ’tis but his humor. The business of the state does him offence,And he does chide with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If ’twere no other—
'Tis but so, I warrant.
Hark, how these instruments summon to supper. The messengers of Venice stays the meat.Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.
How now, Roderigo!
I do not find that thou deal’st justly with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What in the contrary?
Every day thou daff’st me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keep’st from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yetpersuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.
Will you hear me, Roderigo?
I have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.
You charge me most unjustly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress. You havetold me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I find none.
Well, go to. Very well.
“Very well,” “go to”! I cannot go to, man, nor ’tis not very well. Nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.
Very well.
I tell you ’tis not very well. I will make myself knownto Desdemona. If she will return me my jewels I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have said now.
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.
Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than everbefore. Give me thy hand, Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy affair.
It hath not appeared.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicionis not without wit and judgment. But, Roderigo, if thouhast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than ever—I mean purpose, courage and valor—this night show it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othello’s place.
Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.
Oh, no, he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident—wherein none can be so determinateas the removing of Cassio.
How do you mean, removing of him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place: knocking out his brains.
And that you would have me to do!
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. About it!
I will hear further reason for this.
And you shall be satisfied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
Oh, pardon me, ’twill do me good to walk.
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.
Your honor is most welcome.
Will you walk, sir?—O Desdemona—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be returnedForthwith. Dismiss your attendant there, look ’t be done.
I will, my lord.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
He says he will return incontinent,And hath commanded me to go to bedAnd bid me to dismiss you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dismiss me?
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia, Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu. We must not now displease him.
Ay. Would you had never seen him!
So would not I. My love doth so approve him That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns— Prithee, unpin me—have grace and favor.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All’s one. Good Father, how foolish are our minds!If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud meIn one of these same sheets.
Come, come! You talk!
My mother had a maid called Barbary, She was in love, and he she loved proved mad And did forsake her. She had a song of “Willow,” An old thing ’twas, but it expressed her fortune And she died singing it. That song tonight Will not go from my mind. I have much to do But to go hang my head all at one side And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
Shall I go fetch your nightgown?
No, unpin me here.This Lodovico is a proper man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A very handsome man.
He speaks well.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
( singing) The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, Sing all a green willow. Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, Sing willow, willow, willow. The fresh streams ran by her, and murmured her moans, Sing willow, willow, willow. Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones Sing willow, willow, willow— Lay by these— Willow, willow— Prithee, hie thee, he’ll come anon— Sing all a green willow must be my garland. Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve— Nay, that’s not next—Hark! Who is ’t that knocks?
It’s the wind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](sings) I called my love false love but what said he then? Sing willow, willow, willow. If I court more women you’ll couch with more men— So, get thee gone, good night. Mine eyes do itch, Doth that bode weeping?
'Tis neither here nor there.
I have heard it said so. Oh, these men, these men! Dost thou in conscience think—tell me, Emilia— That there be women do abuse their husbands In such gross kind?
There be some such, no question.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, would not you?
No, by this heavenly light!
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.I might do ’t as well i' th' dark.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price for a small vice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
In troth, I think I should, and undo ’t when I had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for the whole world? Why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for ’t.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrongFor the whole world.
Why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, ’tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.
I do not think there is any such woman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would storethe world they played for. But I do think it is their husbands' faults If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties And pour our treasures into foreign laps, Or else break out in peevish jealousies, Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us, Or scant our former having in despite. Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know Their wives have sense like them. They see and smell And have their palates both for sweet and sour, As husbands have. What is it that they do When they change us for others? Is it sport? I think it is. And doth affection breed it? I think it doth. Is ’t frailty that thus errs? It is so too. And have not we affections, Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? Then let them use us well, else let them know, The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Good night, good night. Heaven me such uses send,Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
Here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come. Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. Quick, quick! Fear nothing. I’ll be at thy elbow. It makes us, or it mars us. Think on that, And fix most firm thy resolution.
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in ’t.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have no great devotion to the deed And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons. 'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
(aside) I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other, Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo, He calls me to a restitution large Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him As gifts to Desdemona. It must not be. If Cassio do remain He hath a daily beauty in his life That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor May unfold me to him—there stand I in much peril. No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.
I know his gait, ’tis he.—Villain, thou diest!
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed But that my coat is better than thou know’stI will make proof of thine.
Oh, I am slain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am maimed for ever. Help, ho! Murder! Murder!
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.
Oh, villain that I am!
It is even so.
Oh, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis he. Oh, brave Iago, honest and just, That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong! Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead, And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come. For, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted. Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust’s blood be spotted.
What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murder! Murder!
'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.
Oh, help!
Hark!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, wretched villain!
Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night,These may be counterfeits. Let’s think ’t unsafe To come in to the cry without more help.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
Hark!
Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s there? Whose noise is this that ones on murder?
We do not know.
Do not you hear a cry?
Here, here! For heaven’s sake, help me!
What’s the matter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To LODOVICO] This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
[To CASSIO] What are you here that cry so grievously?
Iago? Oh, I am spoiled, undone by villains!Give me some help.
Oh, me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think that one of them is hereabout,And cannot make away.
Oh, treacherous villains!— [To LODOVICO and GRATIANO] What are you there? Come in, and give some help.
Oh, help me there!
That’s one of them.
O murd'rous slave! O villain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
Kill men i' th' dark! Where be these bloody thieves? How silent is this town!— Ho! murder! murder!— What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
As you shall prove us, praise us.
Signior Lodovico?
He, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.
Cassio!
How is ’t, brother!
My leg is cut in two.
Marry, heaven forbid! Light, gentlemen, I’ll bind it with my shirt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter, ho? Who is ’t that cried?
Who is ’t that cried?
Oh, my dear Cassio!My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sorry to find you thus. I have been to seek you.
Lend me a garter. So.—Oh, for a chair,To bear him easily hence!
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash To be a party in this injury.— Patience awhile, good Cassio.— Come, come, Lend me a light. Know we this face or no? Alas, my friend and my dear countryman Roderigo! No—yes, sure! Yes, ’tis Roderigo.
What, of Venice?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even he, sir. Did you know him?
Know him? Ay.
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon,These bloody accidents must excuse my mannersThat so neglected you.
I am glad to see you.
How do you, Cassio?—Oh, a chair, a chair!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Roderigo!
He, he, ’tis he.
Oh, that’s well said—the chair! Some good man bear him carefully from hence. I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon.— (to BIANCA) For you, mistress, Save you your labor.—He that lies slain here, Cassio, Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
None in the world, nor do I know the man.
[To BIANCA] What, look you pale?—Oh, bear him out o' the air.—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?—Stay you, goodgentlemen.—Look you pale, mistress?— Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.— Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her. Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness Will speak, though tongues were out of use.
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark By Roderigo and fellows that are ’scaped. He’s almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.— [To BIANCA] What, do you shake at that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
Oh, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
Oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!
I am no strumpet, but of life as honestAs you that thus abuse me.
As I! Fie upon thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dressed.— Come, mistress, you must tell ’s another tale. Emilia, run you to the citadel And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.— Will you go on afore? (aside) This is the night That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood, Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow And smooth as monumental alabaster. Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men. Put out the light, and then put out the light. If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, I can again thy former light restore Should I repent me. But once put out thy light, Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature, I know not where is that Promethean heat That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy rose I cannot give it vital growth again, It must needs wither. I’ll smell thee on the tree. Oh, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade Justice to break her sword! One more, one more. Be thus when thou art dead and I will kill thee And love thee after. (kissing her) One more, and that’sthe last. So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep, But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly, It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Who’s there? Othello?
Ay, Desdemona.
Will you come to bed, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
Ay, my lord.
If you bethink yourself of any crimeUnreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, Solicit for it straight.
Alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by. I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit. No, heavens forfend, I would not kill thy soul!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Talk you of killing?
Ay, I do.
Then heavenHave mercy on me!
Amen, with all my heart.
If you say, I hope you will not kill me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Humh!
And yet I fear you, for you’re fatal then When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know not, Since guiltiness I know not. But yet I feel I fear.
Think on thy sins.
They are loves I bear to you.
Ay, and for that thou diest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That death’s unnatural that kills for loving. Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? Some bloody passion shakes your very frame. These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope They do not point on me.
Peace, and be still.
I will so. What’s the matter?
That handkerchiefWhich I so loved and gave thee, thou gav’stTo Cassio.
No, by my life and soul!Send for the man and ask him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. Thou art on thy deathbed.
Ay—but not yet to die!
Presently. Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, For to deny each article with oath Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
Oh, heaven have mercy on me!
I say “amen.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And have you mercy too! I never did Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio But with such general warranty of heaven As I might love. I never gave him token.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in ’s hand. O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart, And mak’st me call what I intend to do A murder, which I thought a sacrifice! I saw the handkerchief.
He found it then,I never gave it him. Send for him hither,Let him confess a truth.
He hath confessed.
What, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That he hath usèd thee.
How? Unlawfully?
Ay.
He will not say so.
No, his mouth is stopped. Honest IagoHath ta'en order for ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh! My fear interprets. What, is he dead?
Had all his hairs been livesMy great revenge had stomach for them all.
Alas, he is betrayed and I undone.
Out, strumpet! weep’st thou for him to my face?
Oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Down, strumpet!
Kill me tomorrow—let me live tonight!
Nay, if you strive—
But half an hour!
Being done, there is no pause.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But while I say one prayer!
It is too late. [he smothers her]
[within] My lord , my lord! What, ho! My lord, my lord!
What noise is this?—Not dead? Not yet quite dead? I that am cruel am yet merciful, I would not have thee linger in thy pain. So, so.
[within] What, ho! My lord, my lord!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s there?
[within] O good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
Yes, ’tis Emilia.— (to EMILIA) By and by.— She’s dead.— 'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death, The noise was high. Ha! No more moving? Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were ’t good? I think she stirs again—No. What’s best to do? If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife— My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife. Oh, insupportable! Oh, heavy hour! Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe Should yawn at alteration.
[within] I do beseech youThat I may speak with you, O good my lord!
I had forgot thee—Oh, come in, Emilia.Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.Where art thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s the matter with thee now?
O my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done!
What, now?
But now, my lord.
It is the very error of the moon,She comes more nearer earth than she was wont And makes men mad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cassio, my lord, hath killed a young VenetianCalled Roderigo.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed!
No, Cassio is not killed.
Not Cassio killed! Then murder’s out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh.
Oh, falsely, falsely murdered!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, what cry is that?
That? What?
Out and alas, that was my lady’s voice.
Help! Help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
A guiltless death I die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, who hath done this deed?
Nobody. I myself. Farewell.Commend me to my kind lord. Oh, farewell!
Why, how should she be murdered?
Alas, who knows?
You heard her say herself it was not I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She said so. I must needs report the truth.
She’s like a liar gone to burning hell.'Twas I that killed her.
Oh, the more angel she,And you the blacker devil!
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She was false as water.
Thou art rash as fire,To say that she was false. Oh, she was heavenly true!
Cassio did top her, ask thy husband else. Oh, I were damned beneath all depth in hell, But that I did proceed upon just grounds To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
My husband!
Thy husband.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That she was false to wedlock?
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true, If heaven would make me such another world Of one entire and perfect chrysolite, I’d not have sold her for it.
My husband?
Ay, ’twas he that told me on her first. An honest man he is, and hates the slimeThat sticks on filthy deeds.
My husband!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!My husband say that she was false!
He, woman. I say “thy husband”—dost understand the word?My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart. She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
Ha!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do thy worst.This deed of thine is no more worthy heavenThan thou wast worthy her.
Peace, you were best.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt! As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed— I care not for thy sword, I’ll make thee known Though I lost twenty lives.— Help! Help, ho! Help! The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!
What is the matter? How now, general?
Oh, are you come, Iago? You have done well,That men must lay their murders on your neck.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter?
(to IAGO) Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man. He says thou told’st him that his wife was false. I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain. Speak, for my heart is full.
I told him what I thought, and told no moreThan what he found himself was apt and true.
But did you ever tell him she was false?
I did.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie. Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie. She false with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak.My mistress here lies murdered in her bed—
Oh, heavens forfend!
And your reports have set the murder on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.
'Tis a strange truth.
Oh, monstrous act!
Villainy, villainy, villainy! I think upon ’t, I think I smell ’t, Oh, villainy! I thought so then, I’ll kill myself for grief. Oh, villainy, villainy!
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak. 'Tis proper I obey him, but not now. Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
Oh! Oh! Oh!
Nay, lay thee down and roar,For thou hast killed the sweetest innocentThat e'er did lift up eye.
Oh, she was foul!— I scarce did know you, uncle. There lies your niece, Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped. I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father’s dead, Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now, This sight would make him do a desperate turn, Yea, curse his better angel from his side And fall to reprobation.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows That she with Cassio hath the act of shame A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it, And she did gratify his amorous works With that recognizance and pledge of love Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand, It was a handkerchief, an antique token My father gave my mother.
Oh, heaven! Oh, heavenly powers!
Zounds, hold your peace.
' Twill out, ’twill out.—I peace? No, I will speak as liberal as the north. Let heaven and men and devils, let them all, All, all cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.
Be wise, and get you home.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will not.
Fie! Your sword upon a woman?
O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speak’st of I found by fortune and did give my husband. For often, with a solemn earnestness— More than indeed belonged to such a trifle— He begged of me to steal it.
Villainous whore!
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found itAnd I did give ’t my husband.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Filth, thou liest!
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.— (to OTHELLO) O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool Do with so good a wife?
Are there no stones in heavenBut what serve for the thunder?—Precious villain!
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.
Ay, ay. Oh, lay me by my mistress' side.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He’s gone, but his wife’s killed.
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon, Which I have recovered from the Moor. Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass, But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain, For ’tis a damnèd slave.
I am not valiant neither, But ever puny whipster gets my sword. But why should honor outlive honesty? Let it go all.
What did thy song bode, lady? Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan. And die in music. ( singing) Willow, willow, willow — Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor. So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true. So speaking as I think, alas, I die.
I have another weapon in this chamber, It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper. Oh, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Look in upon me then and speak with me, Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
What is the matter?
Behold, I have a weapon. A better never did itself sustain Upon a soldier’s thigh. I have seen the day That with this little arm and this good sword I have made my way through more impediments Than twenty times your stop. But, oh, vain boast! Who can control his fate? ’tis not so now. Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed. Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt, And very sea-mark of my utmost sail. Do you go back dismayed? ’tis a lost fear. Man but a rush against Othello’s breast, And he retires. Where should Othello go?— Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench, Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl, Even like thy chastity. O cursed, cursed slave! Whip me, ye devils, From the possession of this heavenly sight! Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur, Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!— Oh, Desdemona! Desdemona! dead! Oh! Oh!
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
I look down towards his feet, but that’s a fable.If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Wrench his sword from him.
I bleed, sir, but not killed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live,For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.
O thou Othello, thou was once so good,Fall'n in the practice of a cursèd slave,What shall be said to thee?
Why, anything. An honorable murderer, if you will,For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?
Ay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dear general, I never gave you cause.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon. Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know. From this time forth I never will speak word.
What, not to pray?
Torments will ope your lips.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, thou dost best.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, And here another. The one of them imports The death of Cassio to be undertook By Roderigo.
Oh, villain!
Most heathenish and most gross!
Now here’s another discontented paper Found in his pocket too, and this, it seems, Roderigo meant to have sent this damnèd villain But that, belike, Iago in the interim Came in and satisfied him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O thou pernicious caitiff!How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchiefThat was my wife’s?
I found it in my chamber, And he himself confessed but even now That there he dropped it for a special purpose Which wrought to his desire.
O fool! fool! fool!
There is besides in Roderigo’s letter How he upbraids Iago, that he made him Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came That I was cast. And even but now he spake, After long seeming dead—Iago hurt him, Iago set him on.
(to OTHELLO) You must forsake this room and go with us. Your power and your command is taken off And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave, If there be any cunning cruelty That can torment him much and hold him long, It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest Till that the nature of your fault be known To the Venetian state.—Come, bring him away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soft you, a word or two before you go. I have done the state some service, and they know ’t. No more of that. I pray you, in your letters, When you shall these unlucky deeds relate, Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate, Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak Of one that loved not wisely, but too well. Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought, Perplexed in the extreme. Of one whose hand, Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away Richer than all his tribe. Of one whose subdued eyes, Albeit unused to the melting mood, Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees Their medicinal gum. Set you down this, And say besides that in Aleppo once, Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk Beat a Venetian and traduced the state, I took by the throat the circumcisèd dog, And smote him, thus.
Oh, bloody period!
All that is spoke is marred.
[To DESDEMONA] I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,For he was great of heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](to IAGO) O Spartan dog, More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea, Look on the tragic loading of this bed. This is thy work. The object poisons sight, Let it be hid.— Gratiano, keep the house And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor, For they succeed on you.— T o you, lord governor, Remains the censure of this hellish villain: The time, the place, the torture. Oh, enforce it! Myself will straight aboard, and to the state This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
To sing a song that old was sung, From ashes ancient Gower is come; Assuming man's infirmities, To glad your ear, and please your eyes. It hath been sung at festivals, On ember-eves and holy-ales; And lords and ladies in their lives Have read it for restoratives: The purchase is to make men glorious; Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius. If you, born in these latter times, When wit's more ripe, accept my rhymes. And that to hear an old man sing May to your wishes pleasure bring I life would wish, and that I might Waste it for you, like taper-light. This Antioch, then, Antiochus the Great Built up, this city, for his chiefest seat: The fairest in all Syria, I tell you what mine authors say: This king unto him took a fere, Who died and left a female heir, So buxom, blithe, and full of face, As heaven had lent her all his grace; With whom the father liking took, And her to incest did provoke: Bad child; worse father! to entice his own To evil should be done by none: But custom what they did begin Was with long use account no sin. The beauty of this sinful dame Made many princes thither frame, To seek her as a bed-fellow, In marriage-pleasures play-fellow: Which to prevent he made a law, To keep her still, and men in awe, That whoso ask'd her for his wife, His riddle told not, lost his life: So for her many a wight did die, As yon grim looks do testify. What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye I give, my cause who best can justify.
Young prince of Tyre, you have at large receivedThe danger of the task you undertake.
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soulEmbolden'd with the glory of her praise,Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride, For the embracements even of Jove himself; At whose conception, till Lucina reign'd, Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence, The senate-house of planets all did sit, To knit in her their best perfections.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See where she comes, apparell'd like the spring, Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king Of every virtue gives renown to men! Her face the book of praises, where is read Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath Could never be her mild companion. You gods that made me man, and sway in love, That have inflamed desire in my breast To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree, Or die in the adventure, be my helps, As I am son and servant to your will, To compass such a boundless happiness!
Prince Pericles,—
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides, With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touch'd; For death-like dragons here affright thee hard: Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view Her countless glory, which desert must gain; And which, without desert, because thine eye Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die. Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself, Drawn by report, adventurous by desire, Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale, That without covering, save yon field of stars, Here they stand martyrs, slain in Cupid's wars; And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist For going on death's net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught My frail mortality to know itself, And by those fearful objects to prepare This body, like to them, to what I must; For death remember'd should be like a mirror, Who tells us life's but breath, to trust it error. I'll make my will then, and, as sick men do Who know the world, see heaven, but, feeling woe, Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did; So I bequeath a happy peace to you And all good men, as every prince should do; My riches to the earth from whence they came; [To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS] But my unspotted fire of love to you. Thus ready for the way of life or death, I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Scorning advice, read the conclusion then: Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed, As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.
Of all say'd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!Of all say'd yet, I wish thee happiness!
Like a bold champion, I assume the lists, Nor ask advice of any other thought But faithfulness and courage. I am no viper, yet I feed On mother's flesh which did me breed. I sought a husband, in which labour I found that kindness in a father: He's father, son, and husband mild; I mother, wife, and yet his child. How they may be, and yet in two, As you will live, resolve it you. Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts, Why cloud they not their sights perpetually, If this be true, which makes me pale to read it? Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still, Were not this glorious casket stored with ill: But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt For he's no man on whom perfections wait That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate. You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings; Who, finger'd to make man his lawful music, Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken: But being play'd upon before your time, Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime. Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life. For that's an article within our law, As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expired: Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
Great king, Few love to hear the sins they love to act; 'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it. Who has a book of all that monarchs do, He's more secure to keep it shut than shown: For vice repeated is like the wandering wind. Blows dust in other's eyes, to spread itself; And yet the end of all is bought thus dear, The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear: To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng'd By man's oppression; and the poor worm doth die for't. Kings are earth's gods; in vice their law's their will; And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill? It is enough you know; and it is fit, What being more known grows worse, to smother it. All love the womb that their first being bred, Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Heaven, that I had thy head! he has found the meaning: But I will gloze with him. — Young prince of Tyre, Though by the tenor of our strict edict, Your exposition misinterpreting, We might proceed to cancel of your days; Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise: Forty days longer we do respite you; If by which time our secret be undone, This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son: And until then your entertain shall be As doth befit our honour and your worth.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin, When what is done is like an hypocrite, The which is good in nothing but in sight! If it be true that I interpret false, Then were it certain you were not so bad As with foul incest to abuse your soul; Where now you're both a father and a son, By your untimely claspings with your child, Which pleasure fits an husband, not a father; And she an eater of her mother's flesh, By the defiling of her parent's bed; And both like serpents are, who though they feed On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed. Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men Blush not in actions blacker than the night, Will shun no course to keep them from the light. One sin, I know, another doth provoke; Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke: Poison and treason are the hands of sin, Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame: Then, lest my lie be cropp'd to keep you clear, By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear.
He hath found the meaning, for which we mean To have his head. He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy, Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin In such a loathed manner; And therefore instantly this prince must die: For by his fall my honour must keep high. Who attends us there?
Doth your highness call?
Thaliard, You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes Her private actions to your secrecy; And for your faithfulness we will advance you. Thaliard, behold, here's poison, and here's gold; We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him: It fits thee not to ask the reason why, Because we bid it. Say, is it done?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord,'Tis done.
Enough.
Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
My lord, prince Pericles is fled.
As thou Wilt live, fly after: and like an arrow shot From a well-experienced archer hits the mark His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord,If I can get him within my pistol's length,I'll make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.
Thaliard, adieu!
Till Pericles be dead,My heart can lend no succor to my head.
[To Lords without] Let none disturb us.— Why should this change of thoughts, The sad companion, dull-eyed melancholy, Be my so used a guest as not an hour, In the day's glorious walk, or peaceful night, The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me quiet? Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them, And danger, which I fear'd, is at Antioch, Whose aim seems far too short to hit me here: Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits, Nor yet the other's distance comfort me. Then it is thus: the passions of the mind, That have their first conception by mis-dread, Have after-nourishment and life by care; And what was first but fear what might be done, Grows elder now and cares it be not done. And so with me: the great Antiochus, 'Gainst whom I am too little to contend, Since he's so great can make his will his act, Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence; Nor boots it me to say I honour him. If he suspect I may dishonour him: And what may make him blush in being known, He'll stop the course by which it might be known; With hostile forces he'll o'erspread the land, And with the ostent of war will look so huge, Amazement shall drive courage from the state; Our men be vanquish'd ere they do resist, And subjects punish'd that ne'er thought offence: Which care of them, not pity of myself, Who am no more but as the tops of trees, Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them, Makes both my body pine and soul to languish, And punish that before that he would punish.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And keep your mind, till you return to us,Peaceful and comfortable!
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue. They do abuse the king that flatter him: For flattery is the bellows blows up sin; The thing which is flatter'd, but a spark, To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing; Whereas reproof, obedient and in order, Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err. When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace, He flatters you, makes war upon your life. Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please; I cannot be much lower than my knees.
All leave us else; but let your cares o'erlookWhat shipping and what lading's in our haven,And then return to us. [Exeunt Lords] Helicanus, thouHast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?
An angry brow, dread lord.
If there be such a dart in princes' frowns,How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How dare the plants look up to heaven, from whenceThey have their nourishment?
Thou know'st I have powerTo take thy life from thee.
[Kneeling] I have ground the axe myself;Do you but strike the blow.
Rise, prithee, rise. Sit down: thou art no flatterer: I thank thee for it; and heaven forbid That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid! Fit counsellor and servant for a prince, Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant, What wouldst thou have me do?
To bear with patienceSuch griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus, That minister'st a potion unto me That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself. Attend me, then: I went to Antioch, Where as thou know'st, against the face of death, I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty. From whence an issue I might propagate, Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects. Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder; The rest— hark in thine ear— as black as incest: Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father Seem'd not to strike, but smooth: but thou know'st this, 'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss. Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled, Under the covering of a careful night, Who seem'd my good protector; and, being here, Bethought me what was past, what might succeed. I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants' fears Decrease not, but grow faster than the years: And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth, That I should open to the listening air How many worthy princes' bloods were shed, To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope, To lop that doubt, he'll fill this land with arms, And make pretence of wrong that I have done him: When all, for mine, if I may call offence, Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence: Which love to all, of which thyself art one, Who now reprovest me for it,—
Alas, sir!
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks, Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts How I might stop this tempest ere it came; And finding little comfort to relieve them, I thought it princely charity to grieve them.
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak. Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear, And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant, Who either by public war or private treason Will take away your life. Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while, Till that his rage and anger be forgot, Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life. Your rule direct to any; if to me. Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
I do not doubt thy faith;But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,From whence we had our being and our birth.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus Intend my travel, where I'll hear from thee; And by whose letters I'll dispose myself. The care I had and have of subjects' good On thee I lay whose wisdom's strength can bear it. I'll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath: Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both: But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe, That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince, Thou show'dst a subject's shine, I a true prince.
So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I kill King Pericles; and if I do it not, I am sure to be hanged at home: 'tis dangerous. Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that, being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired he might know none of his secrets: now do I see he had some reason for't; for if a king bid a man be a villain, he's bound by the indenture of his oath to be one! Hush! here come the lords of Tyre.
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre, Further to question me of your king's departure: His seal'd commission, left in trust with me, Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.
[Aside] How! the king gone!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If further yet you will be satisfied,Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.Being at Antioch—
[Aside] What from Antioch?
Royal Antiochus—on what cause I know not— Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so: And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd, To show his sorrow, he'ld correct himself; So puts himself unto the shipman's toil, With whom each minute threatens life or death.
[Aside] Well, I perceive I shall not be hang'd now, although I would; But since he's gone, the king's seas must please: He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea. I'll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From him I come With message unto princely Pericles; But since my landing I have understood Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels, My message must return from whence it came.
We have no reason to desire it, Commended to our master, not to us: Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire, As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.
My Dionyza, shall we rest us here,And by relating tales of others' griefs,See if 'twill teach us to forget our own?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it; For who digs hills because they do aspire Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher. O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are; Here they're but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes, But like to groves, being topp'd, they higher rise.
O Dionyza, Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it, Or can conceal his hunger till he famish? Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep, Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder; That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want, They may awake their helps to comfort them. I'll then discourse our woes, felt several years, And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll do my best, sir.
This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government, A city on whom plenty held full hand, For riches strew'd herself even in the streets; Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the clouds, And strangers ne'er beheld but wondered at; Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'd, Like one another's glass to trim them by: Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight, And not so much to feed on as delight; All poverty was scorn'd, and pride so great, The name of help grew odious to repeat.
O, 'tis too true.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change, These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air, Were all too little to content and please, Although they gave their creatures in abundance, As houses are defiled for want of use, They are now starved for want of exercise: Those palates who, not yet two summers younger, Must have inventions to delight the taste, Would now be glad of bread, and beg for it: Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes, Thought nought too curious, are ready now To eat those little darlings whom they loved. So sharp are hunger's teeth, that man and wife Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life: Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping; Here many sink, yet those which see them fall Have scarce strength left to give them burial. Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, let those cities that of plenty's cup And her prosperities so largely taste, With their superfluous riots, hear these tears! The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
Where's the lord governor?
Here.Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste,For comfort is too far for us to expect.
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,A portly sail of ships make hitherward.
I thought as much. One sorrow never comes but brings an heir, That may succeed as his inheritor; And so in ours: some neighbouring nation, Taking advantage of our misery, Hath stuff'd these hollow vessels with their power, To beat us down, the which are down already; And make a conquest of unhappy me, Whereas no glory's got to overcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's the least fear; for, by the semblanceOf their white flags display'd, they bring us peace,And come to us as favourers, not as foes.
Thou speak'st like him's untutor'd to repeat: Who makes the fairest show means most deceit. But bring they what they will and what they can, What need we fear? The ground's the lowest, and we are half way there. Go tell their general we attend him here, To know for what he comes, and whence he comes, And what he craves.
I go, my lord.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;If wars, we are unable to resist.
Lord governor, for so we hear you are, Let not our ships and number of our men Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes. We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre, And seen the desolation of your streets: Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears, But to relieve them of their heavy load; And these our ships, you happily may think Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within With bloody veins, expecting overthrow, Are stored with corn to make your needy bread, And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gods of Greece protect you!And we'll pray for you.
Arise, I pray you, rise:We do not look for reverence, but to love,And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.
The which when any shall not gratify, Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought, Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves, The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils! Till when,—the which I hope shall ne'er be seen,— Your grace is welcome to our town and us.
Which welcome we'll accept; feast here awhile,Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
Here have you seen a mighty king His child, I wis, to incest bring; A better prince and benign lord, That will prove awful both in deed and word. Be quiet then as men should be, Till he hath pass'd necessity. I'll show you those in troubles reign, Losing a mite, a mountain gain. The good in conversation, To whom I give my benison, Is still at Tarsus, where each man Thinks all is writ he speken can; And, to remember what he does, Build his statue to make him glorious: But tidings to the contrary Are brought your eyes; what need speak I?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Helicane, that stay'd at home, Not to eat honey like a drone From others' labours; for though he strive To killen bad, keep good alive; And to fulfil his prince' desire, Sends word of all that haps in Tyre: How Thaliard came full bent with sin And had intent to murder him; And that in Tarsus was not best Longer for him to make his rest. He, doing so, put forth to seas, Where when men been, there's seldom ease; For now the wind begins to blow; Thunder above and deeps below Make such unquiet, that the ship Should house him safe is wreck'd and split; And he, good prince, having all lost, By waves from coast to coast is tost: All perishen of man, of pelf, Ne aught escapen but himself; Till fortune, tired with doing bad, Threw him ashore, to give him glad: And here he comes. What shall be next, Pardon old Gower,—this longs the text.
Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven! Wind, rain, and thunder, remember, earthly man Is but a substance that must yield to you; And I, as fits my nature, do obey you: Alas, the sea hath cast me on the rocks, Wash'd me from shore to shore, and left me breath Nothing to think on but ensuing death: Let it suffice the greatness of your powers To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes; And having thrown him from your watery grave, Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave.
What, ho, Pilch!
Ha, come and bring away the nets!
What, Patch-breech, I say!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say you, master?
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'llfetch thee with a wanion.
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men thatwere cast away before us even now.
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear whatpitiful cries they made to us to help them, when,well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them, they ne'er come but I look to be washed. Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the little ones: I can compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale; a' plays and tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at last devours them all at a mouthful: such whales have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping till they've swallowed the whole parish, church, steeple, bells, and all.
[Aside] A pretty moral.
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would havebeen that day in the belfry.
Why, man?
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I had been in his belly, I would have kept such a jangling of the bells, that he should never have left, till he cast bells, steeple, church, and parish up again. But if the good King Simonides were of my mind,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Simonides!
We would purge the land of these drones, that robthe bee of her honey.
[Aside] How from the finny subject of the sea These fishers tell the infirmities of men; And from their watery empire recollect All that may men approve or men detect! Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.
Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a dayfits you, search out of the calendar, and nobodylook after it.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in ourway!
A man whom both the waters and the wind, In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball For them to play upon, entreats you pity him: He asks of you, that never used to beg.
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in ourcountry Greece gets more with begging than we can dowith working.
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?
I never practised it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here's nothingto be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't.
What I have been I have forgot to know; But what I am, want teaches me to think on: A man throng'd up with cold: my veins are chill, And have no more of life than may suffice To give my tongue that heat to ask your help; Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead, For that I am a man, pray see me buried.
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here; come, put it on; keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks, and thou shalt be welcome.
I thank you, sir.
Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did but crave.
But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so Ishall 'scape whipping.
Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office than to be beadle. But, master, I'll go draw up the net.
[Aside] How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?
Not well.
Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, andour king the good Simonides.
The good King Simonides, do you call him.
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for hispeaceable reign and good government.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjectsthe name of good by his government. How far is hiscourt distant from this shore?
Marry, sir, half a day's journey: and I'll tell you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her birth-day; and there are princes and knights come from all parts of the world to just and tourney for herlove.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wishto make one there.
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a mancannot get, he may lawfully deal for—his wife's soul.
Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net, like a poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly come out. Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and 'tis turned to a rusty armour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it. Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses, Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself; And though it was mine own, part of my heritage, Which my dead father did bequeath to me. With this strict charge, even as he left his life, 'Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield Twixt me and death;'— and pointed to this brace;— 'For that it saved me, keep it; in like necessity— The which the gods protect thee from!— may defend thee.' It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it; Till the rough seas, that spare not any man, Took it in rage, though calm'd have given't again: I thank thee for't: my shipwreck now's no ill, Since I have here my father's gift in's will.
What mean you, sir?
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth, For it was sometime target to a king; I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly, And for his sake I wish the having of it; And that you'ld guide me to your sovereign's court, Where with it I may appear a gentleman; And if that ever my low fortune's better, I'll pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor.
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?
I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, do 'e take it, and the gods give thee good on't!
Ay, but hark you, my friend; 'twas we that made up this garment through the rough seams of the waters: there are certain condolements, certain vails. I hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from whence you had it.
Believe 't, I will. By your furtherance I am clothed in steel; And, spite of all the rapture of the sea, This jewel holds his building on my arm: Unto thy value I will mount myself Upon a courser, whose delightful steps Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread. Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided Of a pair of bases.
We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown tomake thee a pair; and I'll bring thee to the court myself.
Then honour be but a goal to my will,This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?
They are, my liege;And stay your coming to present themselves.
Return them, we are ready; and our daughter, In honour of whose birth these triumphs are, Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat For men to see, and seeing wonder at.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to expressMy commendations great, whose merit's less.
It's fit it should be so; for princes are A model which heaven makes like to itself: As jewels lose their glory if neglected, So princes their renowns if not respected. 'Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain The labour of each knight in his device.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which, to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father; And the device he bears upon his shield Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.'
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
Who is the second that presents himself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A prince of Macedon, my royal father; And the device he bears upon his shield Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady; The motto thus, in Spanish, 'Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.'
And what's the third?
The third of Antioch;And his device, a wreath of chivalry;The word, 'Me pompae provexit apex.'
What is the fourth?
A burning torch that's turned upside down;The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried;The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.'
And what'sThe sixth and last, the which the knight himselfWith such a graceful courtesy deliver'd?
He seems to be a stranger; but his present isA wither'd branch, that's only green at top;The motto, 'In hac spe vivo.'
A pretty moral;From the dejected state wherein he is,He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He had need mean better than his outward show Can any way speak in his just commend; For by his rusty outside he appears To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.
He well may be a stranger, for he comesTo an honour'd triumph strangely furnished.
And on set purpose let his armour rustUntil this day, to scour it in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan The outward habit by the inward man. But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw Into the gallery.
Knights, To say you're welcome were superfluous. To place upon the volume of your deeds, As in a title-page, your worth in arms, Were more than you expect, or more than's fit, Since every worth in show commends itself. Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast: You are princes and my guests.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But you, my knight and guest;To whom this wreath of victory I give,And crown you king of this day's happiness.
'Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours; And here, I hope, is none that envies it. In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed, To make some good, but others to exceed; And you are her labour'd scholar. Come, queen o' the feast,— For, daughter, so you are,— here take your place: Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.
We are honour'd much by good Simonides.
Your presence glads our days: honour we love;For who hates honour hates the gods above.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemenThat neither in our hearts nor outward eyesEnvy the great nor do the low despise.
You are right courteous knights.
Sit, sir, sit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,These cates resist me, she but thought upon.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.Wishing him my meat. Sure, he's a gallant gentleman.
He's but a country gentleman;Has done no more than other knights have done;Has broken a staff or so; so let it pass.
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
Yon king's to me like to my father's picture, Which tells me in that glory once he was; Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne, And he the sun, for them to reverence; None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights, Did vail their crowns to his supremacy: Where now his son's like a glow-worm in the night, The which hath fire in darkness, none in light: Whereby I see that Time's the king of men, He's both their parent, and he is their grave, And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, are you merry, knights?
Who can be other in this royal presence?
Here, with a cup that's stored unto the brim,— As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips,— We drink this health to you.
We thank your grace.
Yet pause awhile: Yon knight doth sit too melancholy, As if the entertainment in our court Had not a show might countervail his worth. Note it not you, Thaisa?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is itTo me, my father?
O, attend, my daughter: Princes in this should live like gods above, Who freely give to every one that comes To honour them: And princes not doing so are like to gnats, Which make a sound, but kill'd are wonder'd at. Therefore to make his entrance more sweet, Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
Alas, my father, it befits not me Unto a stranger knight to be so bold: He may my proffer take for an offence, Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
How!Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
[Aside] Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And further he desires to know of you,Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
A gentleman of Tyre; my name, Pericles; My education been in arts and arms; Who, looking for adventures in the world, Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men, And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles, A gentleman of Tyre, Who only by misfortune of the seas Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune, And will awake him from his melancholy. Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles, And waste the time, which looks for other revels. Even in your armours, as you are address'd, Will very well become a soldier's dance. I will not have excuse, with saying this Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads, Since they love men in arms as well as beds.
So, this was well ask'd,'twas so well perform'd. Come, sir; Here is a lady that wants breathing too: And I have heard, you knights of Tyre Are excellent in making ladies trip; And that their measures are as excellent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In those that practise them they are, my lord.
O, that's as much as you would be deniedOf your fair courtesy.
Unclasp, unclasp: Thanks, gentlemen, to all; all have done well. [ To PERICLES] But you the best. Pages and lights, to conduct These knights unto their several lodgings! Yours, sir, We have given order to be next our own.
I am at your grace's pleasure.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love; And that's the mark I know you level at: Therefore each one betake him to his rest; To-morrow all for speeding do their best.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, Escanes, know this of me, Antiochus from incest lived not free: For which, the most high gods not minding longer To withhold the vengeance that they had in store, Due to this heinous capital offence, Even in the height and pride of all his glory, When he was seated in a chariot Of an inestimable value, and his daughter with him, A fire from heaven came and shrivell'd up Their bodies, even to loathing; for they so stunk, That all those eyes adored them ere their fall Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
'Twas very strange.
And yet but justice; for thoughThis king were great, his greatness was no guardTo bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward.
'Tis very true.
See, not a man in private conferenceOr council has respect with him but he.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
Follow me, then. Lord Helicane, a word.
With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,And now at length they overflow their banks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane; But if the prince do live, let us salute him, Or know what ground's made happy by his breath. If in the world he live, we'll seek him out; If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there; And be resolved he lives to govern us, Or dead, give's cause to mourn his funeral, And leave us to our free election.
Whose death indeed's the strongest in our censure: And knowing this kingdom is without a head,— Like goodly buildings left without a roof Soon fall to ruin,— your noble self, That best know how to rule and how to reign, We thus submit unto,— our sovereign.
Live, noble Helicane!
For honour's cause, forbear your suffrages: If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear. Take I your wish, I leap into the seas, Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease. A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to Forbear the absence of your king: If in which time expired, he not return, I shall with aged patience bear your yoke. But if I cannot win you to this love, Go search like nobles, like noble subjects, And in your search spend your adventurous worth; Whom if you find, and win unto return, You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield;And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,We with our travels will endeavour us.
Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands:When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the good Simonides.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know, That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake A married life. Her reason to herself is only known, Which yet from her by no means can I get.
May we not get access to her, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Faith, by no means; she has so strictly tied Her to her chamber, that 'tis impossible. One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery; This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd And on her virgin honour will not break it.
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
So, They are well dispatch'd; now to my daughter's letter: She tells me here, she'd wed the stranger knight, Or never more to view nor day nor light. 'Tis well, mistress; your choice agrees with mine; I like that well: nay, how absolute she's in't, Not minding whether I dislike or no! Well, I do commend her choice; And will no longer have it be delay'd. Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.
All fortune to the good Simonides!
To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you For your sweet music this last night: I do Protest my ears were never better fed With such delightful pleasing harmony.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is your grace's pleasure to commend;Not my desert.
Sir, you are music's master.
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
Let me ask you one thing:What do you think of my daughter, sir?
A most virtuous princess.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And she is fair too, is she not?
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you;Ay, so well, that you must be her master,And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.
She thinks not so; peruse this writing else.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] What's here? A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre! 'Tis the king's subtlety to have my life. O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord, A stranger and distressed gentleman, That never aim'd so high to love your daughter, But bent all offices to honour her.
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou artA villain.
By the gods, I have not: Never did thought of mine levy offence; Nor never did my actions yet commence A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.
Traitor, thou liest.
Traitor!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, traitor.
Even in his throat—unless it be the king—That calls me traitor, I return the lie.
[Aside] Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts, That never relish'd of a base descent. I came unto your court for honour's cause, And not to be a rebel to her state; And he that otherwise accounts of me, This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy.
No?Here comes my daughter, she can witness it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, as you are as virtuous as fair, Resolve your angry father, if my tongue Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe To any syllable that made love to you.
Why, sir, say if you had,Who takes offence at that would make me glad?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory? [Aside] I am glad on't with all my heart.— I'll tame you; I'll bring you in subjection. Will you, not having my consent, Bestow your love and your affections Upon a stranger? who, for aught I know, May be, nor can I think the contrary, As great in blood as I myself.— Therefore hear you, mistress; either frame Your will to mine,— and you, sir, hear you, Either be ruled by me, or I will make you— Man and wife: Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too: And being join'd, I'll thus your hopes destroy; And for a further grief,—God give you joy!— What, are you both pleased?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Even as my life, or blood that fosters it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, are you both agreed?
Yes, if it please your majesty.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed;And then with what haste you can get you to bed.
Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout; No din but snores the house about, Made louder by the o'er-fed breast Of this most pompous marriage-feast. The cat, with eyne of burning coal, Now crouches fore the mouse's hole; And crickets sing at the oven's mouth, E'er the blither for their drouth. Hymen hath brought the bride to bed. Where, by the loss of maidenhead, A babe is moulded. Be attent, And time that is so briefly spent With your fine fancies quaintly eche: What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.
By many a dern and painful perch Of Pericles the careful search, By the four opposing coigns Which the world together joins, Is made with all due diligence That horse and sail and high expense Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre, Fame answering the most strange inquire, To the court of King Simonides Are letters brought, the tenor these: Antiochus and his daughter dead; The men of Tyrus on the head Of Helicanus would set on The crown of Tyre, but he will none: The mutiny he there hastes t' oppress; Says to 'em, if King Pericles Come not home in twice six moons, He, obedient to their dooms, Will take the crown. The sum of this, Brought hither to Pentapolis, Y-ravished the regions round, And every one with claps can sound, 'Our heir-apparent is a king! Who dream'd, who thought of such a thing?' Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre: His queen with child makes her desire— Which who shall cross?— along to go: Omit we all their dole and woe: Lychorida, her nurse, she takes, And so to sea. Their vessel shakes On Neptune's billow; half the flood Hath their keel cut: but fortune's mood Varies again; the grisly north Disgorges such a tempest forth, That, as a duck for life that dives, So up and down the poor ship drives: The lady shrieks, and well-a-near Does fall in travail with her fear: And what ensues in this fell storm Shall for itself itself perform. I nill relate, action may Conveniently the rest convey; Which might not what by me is told. In your imagination hold This stage the ship, upon whose deck The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou god of this great vast, rebuke these surges, Which wash both heaven and hell; and thou, that hast Upon the winds command, bind them in brass, Having call'd them from the deep! O, still Thy deafening, dreadful thunders; gently quench Thy nimble, sulphurous flashes! O, how, Lychorida, How does my queen? Thou stormest venomously; Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman's whistle Is as a whisper in the ears of death, Unheard. Lychorida!— Lucina, O Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle To those that cry by night, convey thy deity Aboard our dancing boat; make swift the pangs Of my queen's travails!
Now, Lychorida!
Here is a thing too young for such a place, Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I Am like to do: take in your arms this piece Of your dead queen.
How, how, Lychorida!
Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm. Here's all that is left living of your queen, A little daughter: for the sake of it, Be manly, and take comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O you gods! Why do you make us love your goodly gifts, And snatch them straight away? We here below Recall not what we give, and therein may Use honour with you.
Patience, good sir,Even for this charge.
Now, mild may be thy life! For a more blustrous birth had never babe: Quiet and gentle thy conditions! for Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world That ever was prince's child. Happy what follows! Thou hast as chiding a nativity As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make, To herald thee from the womb: even at the first Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit, With all thou canst find here. Now, the good gods Throw their best eyes upon't!
What courage, sir? God save you!
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw; It hath done to me the worst. Yet, for the love Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer, I would it would be quiet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou?Blow, and split thyself.
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kissthe moon, I care not.
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship becleared of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still observed: and we are strong in custom. Therefore briefly yield her; for she must overboard straight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As you think meet. Most wretched queen!
Here she lies, sir.
A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear; No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements Forgot thee utterly: nor have I time To give thee hallow'd to thy grave, but straight Must cast thee, scarcely coffin'd, in the ooze; Where, for a monument upon thy bones, And e'er-remaining lamps, the belching whale And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse, Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida, Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper, My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander Bring me the satin coffer: lay the babe Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulkedand bitumed ready.
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are near Tarsus.
Thither, gentle mariner.Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
By break of day, if the wind cease.
O, make for Tarsus! There will I visit Cleon, for the babe Cannot hold out to Tyrus: there I'll leave it At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner: I'll bring the body presently.
Philemon, ho!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doth my lord call?
Get fire and meat for these poor men:'T has been a turbulent and stormy night.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,Till now, I ne'er endured.
Your master will be dead ere you return;There's nothing can be minister'd to natureThat can recover him. [TO PHILEMON] Give this to the 'pothecary,And tell me how it works.
Good morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to your lordship.
Gentlemen,Why do you stir so early?
Sir, Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea, Shook as the earth did quake; The very principals did seem to rend, And all-to topple: pure surprise and fear Made me to quit the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early;'Tis not our husbandry.
O, you say well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But I much marvel that your lordship, having Rich tire about you, should at these early hours Shake off the golden slumber of repose. 'Tis most strange, Nature should be so conversant with pain, Being thereto not compell'd.
I hold it ever, Virtue and cunning were endowments greater Than nobleness and riches: careless heirs May the two latter darken and expend; But immortality attends the former. Making a man a god. 'Tis known, I ever Have studied physic, through which secret art, By turning o'er authorities, I have, Together with my practise, made familiar To me and to my aid the blest infusions That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones; And I can speak of the disturbances That nature works, and of her cures; which doth give me A more content in course of true delight Than to be thirsty after tottering honour, Or tie my treasure up in silken bags, To please the fool and death.
Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth Your charity, and hundreds call themselves Your creatures, who by you have been restored: And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay.
So; lift there.
What is that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, even nowDid the sea toss upon our shore this chest:'Tis of some wreck.
Set 't down, let's look upon't.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
Whate'er it be, 'Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight: If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold, 'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
'Tis so, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed!Did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,As toss'd it upon shore.
Wrench it open;Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.
A delicate odour.
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.O you most potent gods! what's here? a corse!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most strange!
Shrouded in cloth of state; balm'd and entreasured With full bags of spices! A passport too! Apollo, perfect me in the characters! [Reading from a scroll] 'Here I give to understand, If e'er this coffin drive a-land, I, King Pericles, have lost This queen, worth all our mundane cost. Who finds her, give her burying; She was the daughter of a king: Besides this treasure for a fee, The gods requite his charity!' If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.
Nay, certainly to-night; For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within: Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
Death may usurp on nature many hours, And yet the fire of life kindle again The o'erpress'd spirits. I heard of an Egyptian That had nine hours lien dead, Who was by good appliance recovered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well said, well said; the fire and cloths. The rough and woeful music that we have, Cause it to sound, beseech you. The viol once more: how thou stirr'st, thou block! The music there!— I pray you, give her air. Gentlemen. This queen will live: nature awakes; a warmth Breathes out of her: she hath not been entranced Above five hours: see how she gins to blow Into life's flower again!
The heavens,Through you, increase our wonder and set upYour fame forever.
She is alive; behold, Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels Which Pericles hath lost, Begin to part their fringes of bright gold; The diamonds of a most praised water Do appear, to make the world twice rich. Live, And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature, Rare as you seem to be.
O dear Diana,Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Is not this strange?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most rare.
Hush, my gentle neighbours! Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear her. Get linen: now this matter must be look'd to, For her relapse is mortal. Come, come; And AEsculapius guide us!
Most honour'd Cleon, I must needs be gone; My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands In a litigious peace. You, and your lady, Take from my heart all thankfulness! The gods Make up the rest upon you!
Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally,Yet glance full wanderingly on us.
O your sweet queen!That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,To have bless'd mine eyes with her!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We cannot but obey The powers above us. Could I rage and roar As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end Must be as 'tis. My gentle babe Marina, whom, For she was born at sea, I have named so, here I charge your charity withal, leaving her The infant of your care; beseeching you To give her princely training, that she may be Manner'd as she is born.
Fear not, my lord, but think Your grace, that fed my country with your corn, For which the people's prayers still fall upon you, Must in your child be thought on. If neglection Should therein make me vile, the common body, By you relieved, would force me to my duty: But if to that my nature need a spur, The gods revenge it upon me and mine, To the end of generation!
I believe you; Your honour and your goodness teach me to't, Without your vows. Till she be married, madam, By bright Diana, whom we honour, all Unscissor'd shall this hair of mine remain, Though I show ill in't. So I take my leave. Good madam, make me blessed in your care In bringing up my child.
I have one myself,Who shall not be more dear to my respectThan yours, my lord.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the shore,Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune andThe gentlest winds of heaven.
I will embrace Your offer. Come, dearest madam. O, no tears, Lychorida, no tears: Look to your little mistress, on whose grace You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord.
Madam, this letter, and some certain jewels,Lay with you in your coffer: which are nowAt your command. Know you the character?
It is my lord's. That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember, Even on my eaning time; but whether there Deliver'd, by the holy gods, I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles, My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again, A vestal livery will I take me to, And never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak, Diana's temple is not distant far, Where you may abide till your date expire. Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine Shall there attend you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My recompense is thanks, that's all;Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre, Welcomed and settled to his own desire. His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus, Unto Diana there a votaress. Now to Marina bend your mind, Whom our fast-growing scene must find At Tarsus, and by Cleon train'd In music, letters; who hath gain'd Of education all the grace, Which makes her both the heart and place Of general wonder. But, alack, That monster envy, oft the wrack Of earned praise, Marina's life Seeks to take off by treason's knife. And in this kind hath our Cleon One daughter, and a wench full grown, Even ripe for marriage-rite; this maid Hight Philoten: and it is said For certain in our story, she Would ever with Marina be: Be't when she weaved the sleided silk With fingers long, small, white as milk; Or when she would with sharp needle wound The cambric, which she made more sound By hurting it; or when to the lute She sung, and made the night-bird mute, That still records with moan; or when She would with rich and constant pen Vail to her mistress Dian; still This Philoten contends in skill With absolute Marina: so With the dove of Paphos might the crow Vie feathers white. Marina gets All praises, which are paid as debts, And not as given. This so darks In Philoten all graceful marks, That Cleon's wife, with envy rare, A present murderer does prepare For good Marina, that her daughter Might stand peerless by this slaughter. The sooner her vile thoughts to stead, Lychorida, our nurse, is dead: And cursed Dionyza hath The pregnant instrument of wrath Prest for this blow. The unborn event I do commend to your content: Only I carry winged time Post on the lame feet of my rhyme; Which never could I so convey, Unless your thoughts went on my way. Dionyza does appear, With Leonine, a murderer.
Thy oath remember; thou hast sworn to do't: 'Tis but a blow, which never shall be known. Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon, To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience, Which is but cold, inflaming love i' thy bosom, Inflame too nicely; nor let pity, which Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be A soldier to thy purpose.
I will do't; but yet she is a goodly creature.
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Hereshe comes weeping for her only mistress' death.Thou art resolved?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am resolved.
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed, To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues, The purple violets, and marigolds, Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave, While summer-days do last. Ay me! poor maid, Born in a tempest, when my mother died, This world to me is like a lasting storm, Whirring me from my friends.
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone? How chance my daughter is not with you? Do not Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have A nurse of me. Lord, how your favour's changed With this unprofitable woe! Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it. Walk with Leonine; the air is quick there, And it pierces and sharpens the stomach. Come, Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.
No, I pray you;I'll not bereave you of your servant.
Come, come; I love the king your father, and yourself, With more than foreign heart. We every day Expect him here: when he shall come and find Our paragon to all reports thus blasted, He will repent the breadth of his great voyage; Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you, Walk, and be cheerful once again; reserve That excellent complexion, which did steal The eyes of young and old. Care not for me I can go home alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I will go;But yet I have no desire to it.
Come, come, I know 'tis good for you.Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:Remember what I have said.
I warrant you, madam.
I'll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:What! I must have a care of you.
My thanks, sweet madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is this wind westerly that blows?
South-west.
When I was born, the wind was north.
Was't so?
My father, as nurse said, did never fear, But cried 'Good seaman!' to the sailors, galling His kingly hands, haling ropes; And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea That almost burst the deck.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When was this?
When I was born: Never was waves nor wind more violent; And from the ladder-tackle washes off A canvas-climber. 'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?' And with a dropping industry they skip From stem to stern: the boatswain whistles, and The master calls, and trebles their confusion.
Come, say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a little space for prayer, I grant it: pray; but be not tedious, For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn To do my work with haste.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my lady.
Why would she have me kill'd? Now, as I can remember, by my troth, I never did her hurt in all my life: I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn To any living creature: believe me, la, I never kill'd a mouse, nor hurt a fly: I trod upon a worm against my will, But I wept for it. How have I offended, Wherein my death might yield her any profit, Or my life imply her any danger?
My commissionIs not to reason of the deed, but do it.
You will not do't for all the world, I hope. You are well favour'd, and your looks foreshow You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately, When you caught hurt in parting two that fought: Good sooth, it show'd well in you: do so now: Your lady seeks my life; come you between, And save poor me, the weaker.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sworn,And will dispatch. [He seizes her]
Hold, villain!
A prize! a prize!
Half-part, mates, half-part.Come, let's have her aboard suddenly.
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes; And they have seized Marina. Let her go: There's no hope she will return. I'll swear she's dead, And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further: Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her, Not carry her aboard. If she remain, Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Boult!
Sir?
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full ofgallants. We lost too much money this mart by beingtoo wenchless.
We were never so much out of creatures. We have but poor three, and they can do no more than they can do; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for them. If there be not a conscience to be used in every trade, we shall never prosper.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poorbastards,—as, I think, I have brought up some eleven—
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. Butshall I search the market?
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong windwill blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
Thou sayest true; they're too unwholesome, o' conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead, that lay with the little baggage.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meatfor worms. But I'll go search the market.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty aproportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to getwhen we are old?
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor the commodity wages not with the danger: therefore, if in our youths we could pick up some pretty estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched. Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving over.
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse. Neither is our profession any trade; it's no calling. But here comes Boult.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To MARINA] Come your ways. My masters, you sayshe's a virgin?
O, sir, we doubt it not.
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.
Boult, has she any qualities?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellentgood clothes: there's no further necessity ofqualities can make her be refused.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What's her price, Boult?
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your money presently. Wife, take her in; instruct her what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her entertainment.
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall have her first.' Such a maidenhead were no cheap thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow! He should have struck, not spoke; or that these pirates, Not enough barbarous, had not o'erboard thrown me For to seek my mother!
Why lament you, pretty one?
That I am pretty.
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
I accuse them not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
The more my faultTo scape his hands where I was like to die.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
No.
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of allfashions: you shall fare well; you shall have thedifference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are you a woman?
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have something to do with you. Come, you're a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have you.
The gods defend me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it please the gods to defend you by men, then menmust comfort you, men must feed you, men must stiryou up. Boult's returned.
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs;I have drawn her picture with my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find theinclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
'Faith, they listened to me as they would have hearkened to their father's testament. There was a Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to her very description.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you know theFrench knight that cowers i' the hams?
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at theproclamation; but he made a groan at it, and sworehe would see her to-morrow.
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease hither: here he does but repair it. I know he will come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the sun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, weshould lodge them with this sign.
[To MARINA] Pray you, come hither awhile. You have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you must seem to do that fearfully which you commit willingly, despise profit where you have most gain. To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
I understand you not.
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: theseblushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for yourbride goes to that with shame which is her way to gowith warrant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, ifI have bargained for the joint,—
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like themanner of your garments well.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom. When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou hast the harvest out of thine own report.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awakethe beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir upthe lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night.
Come your ways; follow me.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.Diana, aid my purpose!
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?
O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughterThe sun and moon ne'er look'd upon!
I thinkYou'll turn a child again.
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world, I'ld give it to undo the deed. O lady, Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess To equal any single crown o' the earth I' the justice of compare! O villain Leonine! Whom thou hast poison'd too: If thou hadst drunk to him, 't had been a kindness Becoming well thy fact: what canst thou say When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates, To foster it, nor ever to preserve. She died at night; I'll say so. Who can cross it? Unless you play the pious innocent, And for an honest attribute cry out 'She died by foul play.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, go to. Well, well,Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the godsDo like this worst.
Be one of those that think The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence, And open this to Pericles. I do shame To think of what a noble strain you are, And of how coward a spirit.
To such proceeding Who ever but his approbation added, Though not his prime consent, he did not flow From honourable sources.
Be it so, then: Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead, Nor none can know, Leonine being gone. She did disdain my child, and stood between Her and her fortunes: none would look on her, But cast their gazes on Marina's face; Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through; And though you call my course unnatural, You not your child well loving, yet I find It greets me as an enterprise of kindness Perform'd to your sole daughter.
Heavens forgive it!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And as for Pericles, What should he say? We wept after her hearse, And yet we mourn: her monument Is almost finish'd, and her epitaphs In glittering golden characters express A general praise to her, and care in us At whose expense 'tis done.
Thou art like the harpy,Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face,Seize with thine eagle's talons.
You are like one that superstitiouslyDoth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:But yet I know you'll do as I advise.
Thus time we waste, and longest leagues make short; Sail seas in cockles, have an wish but for't; Making, to take your imagination, From bourn to bourn, region to region. By you being pardon'd, we commit no crime To use one language in each several clime Where our scenes seem to live. I do beseech you To learn of me, who stand i' the gaps to teach you, The stages of our story. Pericles Is now again thwarting the wayward seas, Attended on by many a lord and knight. To see his daughter, all his life's delight. Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late Advanced in time to great and high estate, Is left to govern. Bear you it in mind, Old Helicanus goes along behind. Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought This king to Tarsus,— think his pilot thought; So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on,— To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone. Like motes and shadows see them move awhile; Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile.
See how belief may suffer by foul show! This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe; And Pericles, in sorrow all devour'd, With sighs shot through, and biggest tears o'ershower'd, Leaves Tarsus and again embarks. He swears Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs: He puts on sackcloth, and to sea. He bears A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears, And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit. The epitaph is for Marina writ By wicked Dionyza. [Reads the inscription on MARINA's monument] 'The fairest, sweet'st, and best lies here, Who wither'd in her spring of year. She was of Tyrus the king's daughter, On whom foul death hath made this slaughter; Marina was she call'd; and at her birth, Thetis, being proud, swallow'd some part o' the earth: Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflow'd, Hath Thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd: Wherefore she does, and swears she'll never stint, Make raging battery upon shores of flint.' No visor does become black villany So well as soft and tender flattery. Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead, And bear his courses to be ordered By Lady Fortune; while our scene must play His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-dayIn her unholy service. Patience, then, And think you now are all in Mytilene.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Did you ever hear the like?
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, shebeing once gone.
But to have divinity preached there! did you everdream of such a thing?
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:shall's go hear the vestals sing?
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous; but Iam out of the road of rutting for ever.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her shehad ne'er come here.
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god Priapus, and undo a whole generation. We must either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When she should do for clients her fitment, and do me the kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks, her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her knees; that she would make a puritan of the devil, if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish usof all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me!
'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by theway to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We should have both lord and lown, if the peevishbaggage would but give way to customers.
How now! How a dozen of virginities?
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
I am glad to see your honour in good health.
You may so; 'tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs. How now! wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal withal, and defy the surgeon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have here one, sir, if she would—but there nevercame her like in Mytilene.
If she'ld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
Well, call forth, call forth.
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shallsee a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had but—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, prithee?
O, sir, I can be modest.
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than itgives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; neverplucked yet, I can assure you.
Is she not a fair creature?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.Well, there's for you: leave us.
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, andI'll have done presently.
I beseech you, do.
[To MARINA] First, I would have you note, this isan honourable man.
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Next, he's the governor of this country, and a manwhom I am bound to.
If he govern the country, you are bound to himindeed; but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, willyou use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
Ha' you done?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take somepains to work her to your manage. Come, we willleave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
What trade, sir?
Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.
I cannot be offended with my trade. Please you to name it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long have you been of this profession?
E'er since I can remember.
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester atfive or at seven?
Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be acreature of sale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,and will come into 't? I hear say you are ofhonourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots of shame and iniquity. O, you have heard something of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly upon thee. Come, bring me to some private place: come, come.
If you were born to honour, show it now; If put upon you, make the judgment good That thought you worthy of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How's this? how's this? Some more; be sage.
For me, That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came, Diseases have been sold dearer than physic, O, that the gods Would set me free from this unhallow'd place, Though they did change me to the meanest bird That flies i' the purer air!
I did not think Thou couldst have spoke so well; ne'er dream'd thou couldst. Had I brought hither a corrupted mind, Thy speech had alter'd it. Hold, here's gold for thee: Persever in that clear way thou goest, And the gods strengthen thee!
The good gods preserve you!
For me, be you thoughten That I came with no ill intent; for to me The very doors and windows savour vilely. Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and I doubt not but thy training hath been noble. Hold, here's more gold for thee. A curse upon him, die he like a thief, That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech your honour, one piece for me.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
How's this? We must take another course with you. If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope, shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like a spaniel. Come your ways.
Whither would you have me?
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common hangman shall execute it. Come your ways. We'll have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! what's the matter?
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holywords to the Lord Lysimachus.
O abominable!
She makes our profession as it were to stink aforethe face of the gods.
Marry, hang her up for ever!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The nobleman would have dealt with her like anobleman, and she sent him away as cold as asnowball; saying his prayers too.
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than sheis, she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark, you gods!
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born to undo us. Will you not go the way of women-kind? Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, mistress; come your ways with me.
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.
Come now, your one thing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art, Since they do better thee in their command. Thou hold'st a place, for which the pained'st fiend Of hell would not in reputation change: Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib; To the choleric fisting of every rogue Thy ear is liable; thy food is such As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs.
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would you? where a man may serve seven years for the loss of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one?
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth; Serve by indenture to the common hangman: Any of these ways are yet better than this; For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak, Would own a name too dear. O, that the gods Would safely deliver me from this place! Here, here's gold for thee. If that thy master would gain by thee, Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance, With other virtues, which I'll keep from boast: And I will undertake all these to teach. I doubt not but this populous city will Yield many scholars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But can you teach all this you speak of?
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,And prostitute me to the basest groomThat doth frequent your house.
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I canplace thee, I will.
But amongst honest women.
'Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them. But since my master and mistress have bought you, there's no going but by their consent: therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough. Come, I'll do for thee what I can; come your ways.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marina thus the brothel 'scapes, and chances Into an honest house, our story says. She sings like one immortal, and she dances As goddess-like to her admired lays; Deep clerks she dumbs; and with her needle composes Nature's own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry, That even her art sisters the natural roses; Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry: That pupils lacks she none of noble race, Who pour their bounty on her; and her gain She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place; And to her father turn our thoughts again, Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost; Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived Here where his daughter dwells; and on this coast Suppose him now at anchor. The city strived God Neptune's annual feast to keep: from whence Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies, His banners sable, trimm'd with rich expense; And to him in his barge with fervor hies. In your supposing once more put your sight Of heavy Pericles; think this his bark: Where what is done in action, more, if might, Shall be discover'd; please you, sit and hark.
[To the Sailor of Mytilene] Where is lord Helicanus? he can resolve you. O, here he is. Sir, there's a barge put off from Mytilene, And in it is Lysimachus the governor, Who craves to come aboard. What is your will?
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.
Doth your lordship call?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come aboard;I pray ye, greet them fairly.
Sir,This is the man that can, in aught you would,Resolve you.
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!
And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,And die as I would do.
You wish me well. Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs, Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us, I made to it, to know of whence you are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]First, what is your place?
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Sir, Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king; A man who for this three months hath not spoken To any one, nor taken sustenance But to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
'Twould be too tedious to repeat;But the main grief springs from the lossOf a beloved daughter and a wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May we not see him?
You may;But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Behold him.
This was a goodly person,Till the disaster that, one mortal night,Drove him to this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you!Hail, royal sir!
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.
Sir,We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,Would win some words of him.
'Tis well bethought. She questionless with her sweet harmony And other chosen attractions, would allure, And make a battery through his deafen'd parts, Which now are midway stopp'd: She is all happy as the fairest of all, And, with her fellow maids is now upon The leafy shelter that abuts against The island's side.
Sure, all's effectless; yet nothing we'll omit That bears recovery's name. But, since your kindness We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you That for our gold we may provision have, Wherein we are not destitute for want, But weary for the staleness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, sir, a courtesy Which if we should deny, the most just gods For every graff would send a caterpillar, And so afflict our province. Yet once more Let me entreat to know at large the cause Of your king's sorrow.
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you:But, see, I am prevented.
O, here isThe lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!Is't not a goodly presence?
She's a gallant lady.
She's such a one, that, were I well assured Came of a gentle kind and noble stock, I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed. Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty Expect even here, where is a kingly patient: If that thy prosperous and artificial feat Can draw him but to answer thee in aught, Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay As thy desires can wish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I will use My utmost skill in his recovery, provided That none but I and my companion maid Be suffer'd to come near him.
Come, let us leave her;And the gods make her prosperous!
Mark'd he your music?
No, nor look'd on us.
See, she will speak to him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail, sir! my lord, lend ear.
Hum, ha!
I am a maid, My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes, But have been gazed on like a comet: she speaks, My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh'd. Though wayward fortune did malign my state, My derivation was from ancestors Who stood equivalent with mighty kings: But time hath rooted out my parentage, And to the world and awkward casualties Bound me in servitude. [Aside] I will desist; But there is something glows upon my cheek, And whispers in mine ear, 'Go not till he speak.'
My fortunes—parentage—good parentage—To equal mine!—was it not thus? what say you?
I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage,You would not do me violence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me.You are like something that—What country-woman?Here of these shores?
No, nor of any shores:Yet I was mortally brought forth, and amNo other than I appear.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping. My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one My daughter might have been: my queen's square brows; Her stature to an inch; as wand-like straight; As silver-voiced; her eyes as jewel-like And cased as richly; in pace another Juno; Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry, The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?
Where I am but a stranger: from the deckYou may discern the place.
Where were you bred?And how achieved you these endowments, whichYou make more rich to owe?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I should tell my history, it would seemLike lies disdain'd in the reporting.
Prithee, speak: Falseness cannot come from thee; for thou look'st Modest as Justice, and thou seem'st a palace For the crown'd Truth to dwell in: I will believe thee, And make my senses credit thy relation To points that seem impossible; for thou look'st Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends? Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back— Which was when I perceived thee— that thou camest From good descending?
So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage. I think thou said'st Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury, And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine, If both were open'd.
Some such thingI said, and said no more but what my thoughtsDid warrant me was likely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell thy story; If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I Have suffer'd like a girl: yet thou dost look Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling Extremity out of act. What were thy friends? How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin? Recount, I do beseech thee: come, sit by me.
My name is Marina.
O, I am mock'd,And thou by some incensed god sent hitherTo make the world to laugh at me.
Patience, good sir,Or here I'll cease.
Nay, I'll be patient.Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me,To call thyself Marina.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The nameWas given me by one that had some power,My father, and a king.
How! a king's daughter?And call'd Marina?
You said you would believe me;But, not to be a troubler of your peace,I will end here.
But are you flesh and blood? Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy? Motion! Well; speak on. Where were you born? And wherefore call'd Marina?
Call'd MarinaFor I was born at sea.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At sea! what mother?
My mother was the daughter of a king; Who died the minute I was born, As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft Deliver'd weeping.
O, stop there a little! [Aside] This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be: My daughter's buried. Well: where were you bred? I'll hear you more, to the bottom of your story, And never interrupt you.
You scorn: believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
I will believe you by the syllableOf what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave:How came you in these parts? where were you bred?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king my father did in Tarsus leave me; Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife, Did seek to murder me: and having woo'd A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't, A crew of pirates came and rescued me; Brought me to Mytilene. But, good sir, Whither will you have me? Why do you weep? It may be, You think me an impostor: no, good faith; I am the daughter to King Pericles, If good King Pericles be.
Ho, Helicanus!
Calls my lord?
Thou art a grave and noble counsellor, Most wise in general: tell me, if thou canst, What this maid is, or what is like to be, That thus hath made me weep?
I know not; butHere is the regent, sir, of MytileneSpeaks nobly of her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She would never tellHer parentage; being demanded that,She would sit still and weep.
O Helicanus, strike me, honour'd sir; Give me a gash, put me to present pain; Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me O'erbear the shores of my mortality, And drown me with their sweetness . O, come hither, Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget; Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus, And found at sea again! O Helicanus, Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud As thunder threatens us: this is Marina. What was thy mother's name? tell me but that, For truth can never be confirm'd enough, Though doubts did ever sleep.
First, sir, I pray,What is your title?
I am Pericles of Tyre: but tell me now My drown'd queen's name, as in the rest you said Thou hast been godlike perfect, The heir of kingdoms and another like To Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be your daughter than To say my mother's name was Thaisa? Thaisa was my mother, who did end The minute I began.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, blessing on thee! rise; thou art my child. Give me fresh garments. Mine own, Helicanus; She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been, By savage Cleon: she shall tell thee all; When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Sir, 'tis the governor of Mytilene,Who, hearing of your melancholy state,Did come to see you.
I embrace you. Give me my robes. I am wild in my beholding. O heavens bless my girl! But, hark, what music? Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt, How sure you are my daughter. But, what music?
My lord, I hear none.
None!The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is not good to cross him; give him way.
Rarest sounds! Do ye not hear?
My lord, I hear.
Most heavenly music!It nips me unto listening, and thick slumberHangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.
A pillow for his head: So, leave him all. Well, my companion friends, If this but answer to my just belief, I'll well remember you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither, And do upon mine altar sacrifice. There, when my maiden priests are met together, Before the people all, Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife: To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call And give them repetition to the life. Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe; Do it, and happy; by my silver bow! Awake, and tell thy dream.
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,I will obey thee. Helicanus!
Sir?
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike The inhospitable Cleon; but I am For other service first: toward Ephesus Turn our blown sails; eftsoons I'll tell thee why. [To LYSIMACHUS] Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore, And give you gold for such provision As our intents will need?
Sir,With all my heart; and, when you come ashore,I have another suit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You shall prevail,Were it to woo my daughter; for it seemsYou have been noble towards her.
Sir, lend me your arm.
Come, my Marina.
Now our sands are almost run; More a little, and then dumb. This, my last boon, give me, For such kindness must relieve me, That you aptly will suppose What pageantry, what feats, what shows, What minstrelsy, and pretty din, The regent made in Mytilene To greet the king. So he thrived, That he is promised to be wived To fair Marina; but in no wise Till he had done his sacrifice, As Dian bade: whereto being bound, The interim, pray you, all confound. In feather'd briefness sails are fill'd, And wishes fall out as they're will'd. At Ephesus, the temple see, Our king and all his company. That he can hither come so soon, Is by your fancy's thankful doom.
Hail, Dian! to perform thy just command, I here confess myself the king of Tyre; Who, frighted from my country, did wed At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa. At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth A maid-child call'd Marina; who, O goddess, Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus Was nursed with Cleon; who at fourteen years He sought to murder: but her better stars Brought her to Mytilene; 'gainst whose shore Riding, her fortunes brought the maid aboard us, Where, by her own most clear remembrance, she Made known herself my daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Voice and favour!You are, you are—O royal Pericles!
What means the nun? she dies! help, gentlemen!
Noble sir,If you have told Diana's altar true,This is your wife.
Reverend appearer, no;I threw her overboard with these very arms.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis most certain.
Look to the lady; O, she's but o'erjoy'd. Early in blustering morn this lady was Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin, Found there rich jewels; recover'd her, and placed her Here in Diana's temple.
May we see them?
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is recovered.
O, let me look! If he be none of mine, my sanctity Will to my sense bend no licentious ear, But curb it, spite of seeing. O, my lord, Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake, Like him you are: did you not name a tempest, A birth, and death?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The voice of dead Thaisa!
That Thaisa am I, supposed deadAnd drown'd.
Immortal Dian!
Now I know you better.When we with tears parted Pentapolis,The king my father gave you such a ring.
This, this: no more, you gods! your present kindness Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well, That on the touching of her lips I may Melt and no more be seen. O, come, be buried A second time within these arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My heartLeaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
Look, who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa;Thy burden at the sea, and call'd MarinaFor she was yielded there.
Blest, and mine own!
Hail, madam, and my queen!
I know you not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre, I left behind an ancient substitute: Can you remember what I call'd the man? I have named him oft.
'Twas Helicanus then.
Still confirmation: Embrace him, dear Thaisa; this is he. Now do I long to hear how you were found; How possibly preserved; and who to thank, Besides the gods, for this great miracle.
Lord Cerimon, my lord; this man,Through whom the gods have shown their power; that canFrom first to last resolve you.
Reverend sir, The gods can have no mortal officer More like a god than you. Will you deliver How this dead queen re-lives?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will, my lord. Beseech you, first go with me to my house, Where shall be shown you all was found with her; How she came placed here in the temple; No needful thing omitted.
Pure Dian, bless thee for thy vision! I Will offer night-oblations to thee. Thaisa, This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter, Shall marry her at Pentapolis. And now, This ornament Makes me look dismal will I clip to form; And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd, To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,My father's dead.
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen, We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves Will in that kingdom spend our following days: Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign. Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay To hear the rest untold: sir, lead's the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard Of monstrous lust the due and just reward: In Pericles, his queen and daughter, seen, Although assail'd with fortune fierce and keen, Virtue preserved from fell destruction's blast, Led on by heaven, and crown'd with joy at last: In Helicanus may you well descry A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty: In reverend Cerimon there well appears The worth that learned charity aye wears: For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame Had spread their cursed deed, and honour'd name Of Pericles, to rage the city turn, That him and his they in his palace burn; The gods for murder seemed so content To punish them; although not done, but meant. So, on your patience evermore attending, New joy wait on you! Here our play has ending.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster, Hast thou, according to thy oath and band, Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son, Here to make good the boisterous late appeal, Which then our leisure would not let us hear, Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
I have, my liege.
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him, If he appeal the duke on ancient malice; Or worthily, as a good subject should, On some known ground of treachery in him?
As near as I could sift him on that argument, On some apparent danger seen in him Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.
Then call them to our presence; face to face, And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear The accuser and the accused freely speak : High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire, In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Many years of happy days befalMy gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
Each day still better other's happiness ; Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap, Add an immortal title to your crown!
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us, As well appeareth by the cause you come; Namely to appeal each other of high treason. Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First, heaven be the record to my speech! In the devotion of a subject's love, Tendering the precious safety of my prince, And free from other misbegotten hate, Come I appellant to this princely presence. Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee, And mark my greeting well; for what I speak My body shall make good upon this earth, Or my divine soul answer it in heaven. Thou art a traitor and a miscreant, Too good to be so and too bad to live, Since the more fair and crystal is the sky, The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly. Once more, the more to aggravate the note, With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat; And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move, What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal: 'Tis not the trial of a woman's war, The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain; The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this: Yet can I not of such tame patience boast As to be hush'd and nought at all to say: First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me From giving reins and spurs to my free speech; Which else would post until it had return'd These terms of treason doubled down his throat. Setting aside his high blood's royalty, And let him be no kinsman to my liege, I do defy him, and I spit at him; Call him a slanderous coward and a villain: Which to maintain I would allow him odds, And meet him, were I tied to run afoot Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps, Or any other ground inhabitable, Where ever Englishman durst set his foot. Mean time let this defend my loyalty, By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage, Disclaiming here the kindred of the king, And lay aside my high blood's royalty, Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except. If guilty dread have left thee so much strength As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop: By that and all the rites of knighthood else, Will I make good against thee, arm to arm, What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
I take it up; and by that sword I swear Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder, I'll answer thee in any fair degree, Or chivalrous design of knightly trial: And when I mount, alive may I not light, If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge? It must be great that can inherit us So much as of a thought of ill in him.
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true; That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers, The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments, Like a false traitor and injurious villain. Besides I say and will in battle prove, Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge That ever was survey'd by English eye, That all the treasons for these eighteen years Complotted and contrived in this land Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring. Further I say and further will maintain Upon his bad life to make all this good, That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death, Suggest his soon-believing adversaries, And consequently, like a traitor coward, Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood: Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries, Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth, To me for justice and rough chastisement; And, by the glorious worth of my descent, This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
How high a pitch his resolution soars!Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, let my sovereign turn away his face And bid his ears a little while be deaf, Till I have told this slander of his blood, How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears: Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir, As he is but my father's brother's son, Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow, Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize The unstooping firmness of my upright soul: He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou: Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest. Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers; The other part reserved I by consent, For that my sovereign liege was in my debt Upon remainder of a dear account, Since last I went to France to fetch his queen: Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death, I slew him not; but to my own disgrace Neglected my sworn duty in that case. For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster, The honourable father to my foe Once did I lay an ambush for your life, A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul But ere I last received the sacrament I did confess it, and exactly begg'd Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it. This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd, It issues from the rancour of a villain, A recreant and most degenerate traitor Which in myself I boldly will defend; And interchangeably hurl down my gage Upon this overweening traitor's foot, To prove myself a loyal gentleman Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom. In haste whereof, most heartily I pray Your highness to assign our trial day.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me; Let's purge this choler without letting blood: This we prescribe, though no physician; Deep malice makes too deep incision; Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed; Our doctors say this is no month to bleed. Good uncle, let this end where it begun; We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
To be a make-peace shall become my age:Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And, Norfolk, throw down his.
When, Harry, when?Obedience bids I should not bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot. My life thou shalt command, but not my shame: The one my duty owes; but my fair name, Despite of death that lives upon my grave, To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have. I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here, Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear, The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood Which breathed this poison.
Rage must be withstood:Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame. And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord, The purest treasure mortal times afford Is spotless reputation: that away, Men are but gilded loam or painted clay. A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast. Mine honour is my life; both grow in one: Take honour from me, and my life is done: Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try; In that I live and for that will I die.
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin! Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight? Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong, Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear The slavish motive of recanting fear, And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace, Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.
We were not born to sue, but to command; Which since we cannot do to make you friends, Be ready, as your lives shall answer it, At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day: There shall your swords and lances arbitrate The swelling difference of your settled hate: Since we can not atone you, we shall see Justice design the victor's chivalry. Lord marshal, command our officers at arms Be ready to direct these home alarms.
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood Doth more solicit me than your exclaims, To stir against the butchers of his life! But since correction lieth in those hands Which made the fault that we cannot correct, Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven; Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth, Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur? Hath love in thy old blood no living fire? Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one, Were as seven vials of his sacred blood, Or seven fair branches springing from one root: Some of those seven are dried by nature's course, Some of those branches by the Destinies cut; But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester, One vial full of Edward's sacred blood, One flourishing branch of his most royal root, Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt, Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded, By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe. Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb, That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee Made him a man ; and though thou livest and breathest, Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent In some large measure to thy father's death, In that thou seest thy wretched brother die, Who was the model of thy father's life. Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair: In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd, Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life, Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee: That which in mean men we intitle patience Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts. What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life, The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute, His deputy anointed in His sight, Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully, Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift An angry arm against His minister.
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
To God, the widow's champion and defence.
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt. Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight: O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear, That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast! Or, if misfortune miss the first career, Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom, They may break his foaming courser's back, And throw the rider headlong in the lists, A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford! Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife With her companion grief must end her life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:As much good stay with thee as go with me!
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls, Not with the empty hollowness, but weight: I take my leave before I have begun, For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done. Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York. Lo, this is all:—nay, yet depart not so; Though this be all, do not so quickly go; I shall remember more. Bid him—ah, what?— With all good speed at Plashy visit me. Alack, and what shall good old York there see But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls, Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones? And what hear there for welcome but my groans? Therefore commend me; let him not come there, To seek out sorrow that dwells every where. Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die: The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stayFor nothing but his majesty's approach.
Marshal, demand of yonder champion The cause of his arrival here in arms: Ask him his name and orderly proceed To swear him in the justice of his cause.
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms, Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel: Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath; As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk; Who hither come engaged by my oath— Which God defend a knight should violate!— Both to defend my loyalty and truth To God, my king and my succeeding issue, Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me And, by the grace of God and this mine arm, To prove him, in defending of myself, A traitor to my God, my king, and me: And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms, Both who he is and why he cometh hither Thus plated in habiliments of war, And formally, according to our law, Depose him in the justice of his cause.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither, Before King Richard in his royal lists? Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel? Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby Am I; who ready here do stand in arms, To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour, In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous, To God of heaven, King Richard and to me; And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
On pain of death, no person be so bold Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists, Except the marshal and such officers Appointed to direct these fair designs.
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand, And bow my knee before his majesty: For Mowbray and myself are like two men That vow a long and weary pilgrimage; Then let us take a ceremonious leave And loving farewell of our several friends.
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will descend and fold him in our arms. Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right, So be thy fortune in this royal fight! Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed, Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
O let no noble eye profane a tear For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear: As confident as is the falcon's flight Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight. My loving lord, I take my leave of you; Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle; Not sick, although I have to do with death, But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath. Lo, as at English feasts, so I regret The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet: O thou, the earthly author of my blood, Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate, Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up To reach at victory above my head, Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers; And with thy blessings steel my lance's point, That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat, And furnish new the name of John a Gaunt, Even in the lusty havior of his son.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous! Be swift like lightning in the execution; And let thy blows, doubly redoubled, Fall like amazing thunder on the casque Of thy adverse pernicious enemy: Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!
However God or fortune cast my lot, There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne, A loyal, just and upright gentleman: Never did captive with a freer heart Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement, More than my dancing soul doth celebrate This feast of battle with mine adversary. Most mighty liege, and my companion peers, Take from my mouth the wish of happy years: As gentle and as jocund as to jest Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, my lord: securely I espyVirtue with valour couched in thine eye.Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself, On pain to be found false and recreant, To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, A traitor to his God, his king and him; And dares him to set forward to the fight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, On pain to be found false and recreant, Both to defend himself and to approve Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby, To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal; Courageously and with a free desire Attending but the signal to begin.
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears, And both return back to their chairs again: Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound While we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near, And list what with our council we have done. For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd With that dear blood which it hath fostered; And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword; And for we think the eagle-winged pride Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts, With rival-hating envy, set on you To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep; Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums, With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray, And grating shock of wrathful iron arms, Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace And make us wade even in our kindred's blood, Therefore, we banish you our territories: You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life, Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields Shall not regreet our fair dominions, But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your will be done: this must my comfort be, Sun that warms you here shall shine on me; And those his golden beams to you here lent Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, Which I with some unwillingness pronounce: The sly slow hours shall not determinate The dateless limit of thy dear exile; The hopeless word of 'never to return' Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth: A dearer merit, not so deep a maim As to be cast forth in the common air, Have I deserved at your highness' hands. The language I have learn'd these forty years, My native English, now I must forego: And now my tongue's use is to me no more Than an unstringed viol or a harp, Or like a cunning instrument cased up, Or, being open, put into his hands That knows no touch to tune the harmony: Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue, Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips; And dull unfeeling barren ignorance Is made my gaoler to attend on me. I am too old to fawn upon a nurse, Too far in years to be a pupil now: What is thy sentence then but speechless death, Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
It boots thee not to be compassionate: After our sentence plaining comes too late.
Then thus I turn me from my country's light, To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Return again, and take an oath with thee. Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands; Swear by the duty that you owe to God— Our part therein we banish with yourselves— To keep the oath that we administer: You never shall, so help you truth and God! Embrace each other's love in banishment; Nor never look upon each other's face; Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile This louring tempest of your home-bred hate; Nor never by advised purpose meet To plot, contrive, or complot any ill 'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
I swear.
And I, to keep all this.
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:— By this time, had the king permitted us, One of our souls had wander'd in the air. Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh, As now our flesh is banish'd from this land: Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm; Since thou hast far to go, bear not along The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor, My name be blotted from the book of life, And I from heaven banish'd as from hence! But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know; And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue. Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray; Save back to England, all the world's my way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect Hath from the number of his banish'd years Pluck'd four away.
Six frozen winter spent,Return with welcome home from banishment.
How long a time lies in one little word! Four lagging winters and four wanton springs End in a word: such is the breath of kings.
I thank my liege, that in regard of me He shortens four years of my son's exile: But little vantage shall I reap thereby; For, ere the six years that he hath to spend Can change their moons and bring their times about My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light Shall be extinct with age and endless night; My inch of taper will be burnt and done, And blindfold death not let me see my son.
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But not a minute, king, that thou canst give: Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow, And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow; Thou canst help time to furrow me with age, But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage; Thy word is current with him for my death, But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice, Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave: Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour. You urged me as a judge; but I had rather You would have bid me argue like a father. O, had it been a stranger, not my child, To smooth his fault I should have been more mild: A partial slander sought I to avoid, And in the sentence my own life destroy'd. Alas, I look'd when some of you should say, I was too strict to make mine own away; But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue Against my will to do myself this wrong.
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,From where you do remain let paper show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,As far as land will let me, by your side.
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
I have too few to take my leave of you, When the tongue's office should be prodigal To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is six winters? they are quickly gone.
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set The precious jewel of thy home return.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]
All places that the eye of heaven visits Are to a wise man ports and happy havens. Teach thy necessity to reason thus; There is no virtue like necessity. Think not the king did banish thee, But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit, Where it perceives it is but faintly borne. Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour And not the king exiled thee; or suppose Devouring pestilence hangs in our air And thou art flying to a fresher clime: Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest: Suppose the singing birds musicians, The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd, The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more Than a delightful measure or a dance; For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu; My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet! Where'er I wander, boast of this I can, Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,How far brought you high Hereford on his way?
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,But to the next highway, and there I left him.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind, Which then blew bitterly against our faces, Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
What said our cousin when you parted with him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Farewell:' And, for my heart disdained that my tongue Should so profane the word, that taught me craft To counterfeit oppression of such grief That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave. Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours And added years to his short banishment, He should have had a volume of farewells; But since it would not, he had none of me.
He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt, When time shall call him home from banishment, Whether our kinsman come to see his friends. Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green Observed his courtship to the common people; How he did seem to dive into their hearts With humble and familiar courtesy, What reverence he did throw away on slaves, Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles And patient underbearing of his fortune, As 'twere to banish their affects with him. Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench; A brace of draymen bid God speed him well And had the tribute of his supple knee, With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;' As were our England in reversion his, And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts. Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, Expedient manage must be made, my liege, Ere further leisure yield them further means For their advantage and your highness' loss.
We will ourself in person to this war: And, for our coffers, with too great a court And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, We are inforced to farm our royal realm; The revenue whereof shall furnish us For our affairs in hand: if that come short, Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters; Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold And send them after to supply our wants; For we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste To entreat your majesty to visit him.
Where lies he?
At Ely House.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind To help him to his grave immediately! The lining of his coffers shall make coats To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars. Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him: Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!
Amen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will the king come, that I may breathe my lastIn wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
O, but they say the tongues of dying men Enforce attention like deep harmony: Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain. He that no more must say is listen'd more Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose; More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before: The setting sun, and music at the close, As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last, Writ in remembrance more than things long past: Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear, My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds, As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond, Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound The open ear of youth doth always listen; Report of fashions in proud Italy, Whose manners still our tardy apish nation Limps after in base imitation. Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity— So it be new, there's no respect how vile— That is not quickly buzzed into his ears? Then all too late comes counsel to be heard, Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard. Direct not him whose way himself will choose: 'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired And thus expiring do foretell of him: His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last, For violent fires soon burn out themselves; Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short; He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes; With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder: Light vanity, insatiate cormorant, Consuming means, soon preys upon itself. This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle, This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, This other Eden, demi-paradise, This fortress built by Nature for herself Against infection and the hand of war, This happy breed of men, this little world, This precious stone set in the silver sea, Which serves it in the office of a wall, Or as a moat defensive to a house, Against the envy of less happier lands, This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England, This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth, Renowned for their deeds as far from home, For Christian service and true chivalry, As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry, Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son, This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, Dear for her reputation through the world, Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it, Like to a tenement or pelting farm: England, bound in with the triumphant sea Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame, With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds: That England, that was wont to conquer others, Hath made a shameful conquest of itself. Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, How happy then were my ensuing death!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king is come: deal mildly with his youth; For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?
O how that name befits my composition! Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old: Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast; And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt? For sleeping England long time have I watch'd; Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt: The pleasure that some fathers feed upon, Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks; And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt: Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave, Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, misery makes sport to mock itself: Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
No, no, men living flatter those that die.
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill; Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill. Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land Wherein thou liest in reputation sick; And thou, too careless patient as thou art, Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure Of those physicians that first wounded thee: A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown, Whose compass is no bigger than thy head; And yet, incaged in so small a verge, The waste is no whit lesser than thy land. O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons, From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd, Which art possess'd now to depose thyself. Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, It were a shame to let this land by lease; But for thy world enjoying but this land, Is it not more than shame to shame it so? Landlord of England art thou now, not king: Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou—
A lunatic lean-witted fool, Presuming on an ague's privilege, Darest with thy frozen admonition Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood With fury from his native residence. Now, by my seat's right royal majesty, Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son, This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son, For that I was his father Edward's son; That blood already, like the pelican, Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused: My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul, Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls! May be a precedent and witness good That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood: Join with the present sickness that I have; And thy unkindness be like crooked age, To crop at once a too long wither'd flower. Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee! These words hereafter thy tormentors be! Convey me to my bed, then to my grave: Love they to live that love and honour have.
And let them die that age and sullens have;For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do beseech your majesty, impute his words To wayward sickliness and age in him: He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.
What says he?
Nay, nothing; all is said. His tongue is now a stringless instrument; Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he; His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be. So much for that. Now for our Irish wars: We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, Which live like venom where no venom else But only they have privilege to live. And for these great affairs do ask some charge, Towards our assistance we do seize to us The plate, corn, revenues and moveables, Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong? Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs, Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke About his marriage, nor my own disgrace, Have ever made me sour my patient cheek, Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. I am the last of noble Edward's sons, Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first: In war was never lion raged more fierce, In peace was never gentle lamb more mild, Than was that young and princely gentleman. His face thou hast, for even so look'd he, Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours; But when he frown'd, it was against the French And not against his friends; his noble hand Did will what he did spend and spent not that Which his triumphant father's hand had won ; His hands were guilty of no kindred blood, But bloody with the enemies of his kin. O Richard! York is too far gone with grief, Or else he never would compare between.
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
O my liege, Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased Not to be pardon'd, am content withal. Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford? Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live? Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true? Did not the one deserve to have an heir? Is not his heir a well-deserving son? Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time His charters and his customary rights; Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day; Be not thyself; for how art thou a king But by fair sequence and succession? Now, afore God—God forbid I say true!— If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights, Call in the letters patent that he hath By his attorneys-general to sue His livery, and deny his offer'd homage, You pluck a thousand dangers on your head, You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Think what you will, we seize into our handsHis plate, his goods, his money and his lands.
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell: What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell; But by bad courses may be understood That their events can never fall out good.
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight: Bid him repair to us to Ely House To see this business. To-morrow next We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow: And we create, in absence of ourself, Our uncle York lord governor of England; For he is just and always loved us well. Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part; Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
And living too; for now his son is duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Barely in title, not in revenue.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak moreThat speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford? If it be so, out with it boldly, man; Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No good at all that I can do for him; Unless you call it good to pity him, Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne In him, a royal prince, and many more Of noble blood in this declining land. The king is not himself, but basely led By flatterers; and what they will inform, Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all, That will the king severely prosecute 'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes, And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
And daily new exactions are devised, As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what: But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not, But basely yielded upon compromise That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows: More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
He hath not money for these Irish wars, His burthenous taxations notwithstanding, But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king! But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing, Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm; We see the wind sit sore upon our sails, And yet we strike not, but securely perish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We see the very wreck that we must suffer; And unavoided is the danger now, For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death I spy life peering; but I dare not say How near the tidings of our comfort is.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland: We three are but thyself; and, speaking so, Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay In Brittany, received intelligence That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham, That late broke from the Duke of Exeter, His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint, All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, Are making hither with all due expedience And shortly mean to touch our northern shore: Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay The first departing of the king for Ireland. If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke, Imp out our drooping country's broken wing, Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown, Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt And make high majesty look like itself, Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh; But if you faint, as fearing to do so, Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
Madam, your majesty is too much sad: You promised, when you parted with the king, To lay aside life-harming heaviness And entertain a cheerful disposition.
To please the king I did; to please myself I cannot do it; yet I know no cause Why I should welcome such a guest as grief, Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest As my sweet Richard : yet again, methinks, Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb, Is coming towards me, and my inward soul With nothing trembles : at some thing it grieves, More than with parting from my lord the king.
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, Which shows like grief itself, but is not so; For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, Divides one thing entire to many objects; Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty, Looking awry upon your lord's departure, Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail; Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen, More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen; Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, Which for things true weeps things imaginary.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It may be so; but yet my inward soul Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be, I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad As, though on thinking on no thought I think, Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived From some forefather grief; mine is not so, For nothing had begot my something grief; Or something hath the nothing that I grieve: 'Tis in reversion that I do possess; But what it is, that is not yet known; what I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is; For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope: Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That he, our hope, might have retired his power, And driven into despair an enemy's hope, Who strongly hath set footing in this land: The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself, And with uplifted arms is safe arrived At Ravenspurgh.
Now God in heaven forbid!
Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse, The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy, The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby, With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
Why have you not proclaim'd NorthumberlandAnd all the rest revolted faction traitors?
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship, And all the household servants fled with him To Bolingbroke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe, And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir: Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy, And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother, Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
Despair not, madam.
Who shall hinder me? I will despair, and be at enmity With cozening hope: he is a flatterer, A parasite, a keeper back of death, Who gently would dissolve the bands of life, Which false hope lingers in extremity.
Here comes the Duke of York.
With signs of war about his aged neck: O, full of careful business are his looks! Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts: Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth, Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief. Your husband, he is gone to save far off, Whilst others come to make him lose at home: Here am I left to underprop his land, Who, weak with age, cannot support myself: Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made; Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will! The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold, And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side. Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester; Bid her send me presently a thousand pound: Hold, take my ring.
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,To-day, as I came by, I called there;But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
What is't, knave?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An hour before I came, the duchess died.
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes Comes rushing on this woeful land at once! I know not what to do: I would to God, So my untruth had not provoked him to it, The king had cut off my head with my brother's. What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland? How shall we do for money for these wars? Come, sister,—cousin, I would say—pray, pardon me.Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some cartsAnd bring away the armour that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men? If I know how or which way to order these affairs Thus thrust disorderly into my hands, Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen: The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath And duty bids defend; the other again Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll Dispose of you. Gentlemen, go, muster up your men, And meet me presently at Berkeley. I should to Plashy too; But time will not permit: all is uneven, And every thing is left at six and seven.
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland, But none returns . For us to levy power Proportionable to the enemy Is all unpossible.
Besides, our nearness to the king in loveIs near the hate of those love not the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And that's the wavering commons: for their love Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,Because we ever have been near the king.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Thither will I with you; for little office The hateful commons will perform for us, Except like curs to tear us all to pieces. Will you go along with us?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; I will to Ireland to his majesty. Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain, We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly. Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
Well, we may meet again.
I fear me, never.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
Believe me, noble lord, I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire: These high wild hills and rough uneven ways Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome, And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, Making the hard way sweet and delectable. But I bethink me what a weary way From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company, Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled The tediousness and process of my travel: But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have The present benefit which I possess; And hope to joy is little less in joy Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done By sight of what I have, your noble company.
Of much less value is my companyThan your good words. But who comes here?
It is my son, young Harry Percy,Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.Harry, how fares your uncle?
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, is he not with the queen?
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court, Broken his staff of office and dispersed The household of the king.
What was his reason?He was not so resolved when last we spake together.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh, To offer service to the Duke of Hereford, And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover What power the Duke of York had levied there; Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, my good lord, for that is not forgot Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge, I never in my life did look on him.
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.
My gracious lord, I tender you my service, Such as it is, being tender, raw and young: Which elder days shall ripen and confirm To more approved service and desert.
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure I count myself in nothing else so happy As in a soul remembering my good friends; And, as my fortune ripens with thy love, It shall be still thy true love's recompense: My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stirKeeps good old York there with his men of war?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard; And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour; None else of name and noble estimate.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues A banish'd traitor: all my treasury Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd Shall be your love and labour's recompense.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor; Which, till my infant fortune comes to years, Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
My lord, my answer is—to Lancaster; And I am come to seek that name in England; And I must find that title in your tongue, Before I make reply to aught you say.
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning To raze one title of your honour out: To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will, From the most gracious regent of this land, The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on To take advantage of the absent time And fright our native peace with self-born arms.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall not need transport my words by you;Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,Whose duty is deceiveable and false.
My gracious uncle—
Tut, tut! Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle: I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace' In an ungracious mouth is but profane. Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground? But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march So many miles upon her peaceful bosom, Frighting her pale-faced villages with war And ostentation of despised arms? Comest thou because the anointed king is hence? Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, And in my loyal bosom lies his power. Were I but now the lord of such hot youth As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, From forth the ranks of many thousand French, O, then how quickly should this arm of mine Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee And minister correction to thy fault!
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:On what condition stands it and wherein?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even in condition of the worst degree, In gross rebellion and detested treason: Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come Before the expiration of thy time, In braving arms against thy sovereign.
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford; But as I come, I come for Lancaster. And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye: You are my father, for methinks in you I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father, Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born? If that my cousin king be King of England, It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster. You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin; Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father, To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. I am denied to sue my livery here, And yet my letters-patents give me leave: My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold, And these and all are all amiss employ'd. What would you have me do? I am a subject, And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me; And therefore, personally I lay my claim To my inheritance of free descent.
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
It stands your grace upon to do him right.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lords of England, let me tell you this: I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs And laboured all I could to do him right; But in this kind to come, in braving arms, Be his own carver and cut out his way, To find out right with wrong, it may not be; And you that do abet him in this kind Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is But for his own; and for the right of that We all have strongly sworn to give him aid; And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms: I cannot mend it, I must needs confess, Because my power is weak and all ill left: But if I could, by Him that gave me life, I would attach you all and make you stoop Unto the sovereign mercy of the king; But since I cannot, be it known to you I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well; Unless you please to enter in the castle And there repose you for this night.
An offer, uncle, that we will accept: But we must win your grace to go with us To Bristol castle, which they say is held By Bushy, Bagot and their complices, The caterpillars of the commonwealth, Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause; For I am loath to break our country's laws. Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: Things past redress are now with me past care.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days, And hardly kept our countrymen together, And yet we hear no tidings from the king; Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay. The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven; The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change; Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap, The one in fear to lose what they enjoy, The other to enjoy by rage and war: These signs forerun the death or fall of kings. Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled, As well assured Richard their king is dead.
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind I see thy glory like a shooting star Fall to the base earth from the firmament. Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest: Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
Bring forth these men. Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls— Since presently your souls must part your bodies— With too much urging your pernicious lives, For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood From off my hands, here in the view of men I will unfold some causes of your deaths. You have misled a prince, a royal king, A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, By you unhappied and disfigured clean: You have in manner with your sinful hours Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him, Broke the possession of a royal bed And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs. Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, Near to the king in blood, and near in love Till you did make him misinterpret me, Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries, And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds, Eating the bitter bread of banishment; Whilst you have fed upon my signories, Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods, From my own windows torn my household coat, Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign, Save men's opinions and my living blood, To show the world I am a gentleman. This and much more, much more than twice all this, Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over To execution and the hand of death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]More welcome is the stroke of death to meThan Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.
My comfort is that heaven will take our soulsAnd plague injustice with the pains of hell.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house ; For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated: Tell her I send to her my kind commends; Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'dWith letters of your love to her at large.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thanks, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away. To fight with Glendower and his complices: Awhile to work, and after holiday.
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy To stand upon my kingdom once again. Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand, Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs: As a long-parted mother with her child Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting, So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth, And do thee favours with my royal hands. Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth, Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense; But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom, And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way, Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet Which with usurping steps do trample thee: Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies; And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies. Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords: This earth shall have a feeling and these stones Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king Hath power to keep you king in spite of all. The means that heaven yields must be embraced, And not neglected; else, if heaven would, And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse, The proffer'd means of succor and redress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He means, my lord, that we are too remiss; Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security, Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not That when the searching eye of heaven is hid, Behind the globe, that lights the lower world, Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen In murders and in outrage, boldly here; But when from under this terrestrial ball He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines And darts his light through every guilty hole, Then murders, treasons and detested sins, The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs, Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves? So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke, Who all this while hath revell'd in the night Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes, Shall see us rising in our throne, the east, His treasons will sit blushing in his face, Not able to endure the sight of day, But self-affrighted tremble at his sin. Not all the water in the rough rude sea Can wash the balm off from an anointed king; The breath of worldly men cannot depose The deputy elected by the Lord: For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay A glorious angel: then, if angels fight, Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord! how far off lies your power?
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue And bids me speak of nothing but despair. One day too late, I fear me, noble lord, Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth: O, call back yesterday, bid time return, And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men! To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late, O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state: For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead. Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But now the blood of twenty thousand men Did triumph in my face, and they are fled; And, till so much blood thither come again, Have I not reason to look pale and dead? All souls that will be safe fly from my side, For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
I had forgot myself; am I not king? Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest. Is not the king's name twenty thousand names? Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes At thy great glory. Look not to the ground, Ye favourites of a king: are we not high? High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?
More health and happiness betide my liegeThan can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared; The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care And what loss is it to be rid of care? Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we? Greater he shall not be; if he serve God, We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so: Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend; They break their faith to God as well as us: Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay: The worst is death, and death will have his day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd To bear the tidings of calamity. Like an unseasonable stormy day, Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, As if the world were all dissolved to tears, So high above his limits swells the rage Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel. White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices, Strive to speak big and clap their female joints In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown: The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows Of double-fatal yew against thy state; Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills Against thy seat: both young and old rebel, And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill. Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot? What is become of Bushy? where is Green? That they have let the dangerous enemy Measure our confines with such peaceful steps? If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it: I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption! Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man! Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart! Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas! Would they make peace? terrible hell make war Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
Sweet love, I see, changing his property, Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate: Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.
Where is the duke my father with his power?
No matter where; of comfort no man speak: Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs; Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth, Let's choose executors and talk of wills: And yet not so, for what can we bequeath Save our deposed bodies to the ground? Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's, And nothing can we call our own but death And that small model of the barren earth Which serves as paste and cover to our bones. For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground And tell sad stories of the death of kings; How some have been deposed; some slain in war, Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed; Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd; All murder'd: for within the hollow crown That rounds the mortal temples of a king Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits, Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp, Allowing him a breath, a little scene, To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks, Infusing him with self and vain conceit, As if this flesh which walls about our life, Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus Comes at the last and with a little pin Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king! Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood With solemn reverence: throw away respect, Tradition, form and ceremonious duty, For you have but mistook me all this while: I live with bread like you, feel want, Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus, How can you say to me, I am a king?
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes, But presently prevent the ways to wail. To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength, Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, And so your follies fight against yourself. Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight: And fight and die is death destroying death; Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My father hath a power; inquire of himAnd learn to make a body of a limb.
Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come To change blows with thee for our day of doom. This ague fit of fear is over-blown; An easy task it is to win our own. Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
Men judge by the complexion of the sky The state and inclination of the day: So may you by my dull and heavy eye, My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. I play the torturer, by small and small To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken: Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke, And all your northern castles yielded up, And all your southern gentlemen in arms Upon his party.
Thou hast said enough. Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth Of that sweet way I was in to despair! What say you now? what comfort have we now? By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly That bids me be of comfort any more. Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away; A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey. That power I have, discharge; and let them go To ear the land that hath some hope to grow, For I have none: let no man speak again To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
My liege, one word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He does me double wrong That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue. Discharge my followers: let them hence away, From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.
So that by this intelligence we learn The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed With some few private friends upon this coast.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland To say 'King Richard': alack the heavy day When such a sacred king should hide his head.
Your grace mistakes; only to be briefLeft I his title out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The time hath been, Would you have been so brief with him, he would Have been so brief with you, to shorten you, For taking so the head, your whole head's length .
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myselfAgainst their will. But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,Against thy entrance.
Royally!Why, it contains no king?
Yes, my good lord, It doth contain a king; King Richard lies Within the limits of yon lime and stone: And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
Noble lords, Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle; Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver: Henry Bolingbroke On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand And sends allegiance and true faith of heart To his most royal person, hither come Even at his feet to lay my arms and power, Provided that my banishment repeal'd And lands restored again be freely granted: If not, I'll use the advantage of my power And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen: The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land, My stooping duty tenderly shall show. Go, signify as much, while here we march Upon the grassy carpet of this plain. Let's march without the noise of threatening drum, That from this castle's tatter'd battlements Our fair appointments may be well perused. Methinks King Richard and myself should meet With no less terror than the elements Of fire and water, when their thundering shock At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water: The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain My waters; on the earth, and not on him. March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See, see, King Richard doth himself appear, As doth the blushing discontented sun From out the fiery portal of the east, When he perceives the envious clouds are bent To dim his glory and to stain the track Of his bright passage to the occident.
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye, As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe, That any harm should stain so fair a show!
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood To watch the fearful bending of thy knee, Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:And if we be, how dare thy joints forgetTo pay their awful duty to our presence?If we be not, show us the hand of GodThat hath dismissed us from our stewardship;For well we know, no hand of blood and boneCan gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.And though you think that all, as you have done,Have torn their souls by turning them from us,And we are barren and bereft of friends;Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,Is mustering in his clouds on our behalfArmies of pestilence; and they shall strikeYour children yet unborn and unbegot,That lift your vassal hands against my headAnd threat the glory of my precious crown.Tell Bolingbroke—for yond methinks he stands—That every stride he makes upon my land Is dangerous treason: he is come to open The purple testament of bleeding war;But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sonsShall ill become the flower of England's face,Change the complexion of her maid-pale peaceTo scarlet indignation and bedewHer pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king Should so with civil and uncivil arms Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand; And by the honourable tomb he swears, That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, And by the royalties of both your bloods, Currents that spring from one most gracious head, And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt, And by the worth and honour of himself, Comprising all that may be sworn or said, His coming hither hath no further scope Than for his lineal royalties and to beg Enfranchisement immediate on his knees: Which on thy royal party granted once, His glittering arms he will commend to rust, His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart To faithful service of your majesty. This swears he, as he is a prince, is just; And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
Northumberland, say thus the king returns: His noble cousin is right welcome hither; And all the number of his fair demands Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction: With all the gracious utterance thou hast Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, To look so poorly and to speak so fair? Shall we call back Northumberland, and send Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle wordsTill time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine, That laid the sentence of dread banishment On yon proud man, should take it off again With words of sooth! O that I were as great As is my grief, or lesser than my name! Or that I could forget what I have been, Or not remember what I must be now! Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat, Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
What must the king do now? must he submit? The king shall do it: must he be deposed? The king shall be contented: must he lose The name of king? o' God's name, let it go: I'll give my jewels for a set of beads, My gorgeous palace for a hermitage, My gay apparel for an almsman's gown, My figured goblets for a dish of wood, My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff, My subjects for a pair of carved saints And my large kingdom for a little grave, A little little grave, an obscure grave; Or I'll be buried in the king's highway, Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet May hourly trample on their sovereign's head; For on my heart they tread now whilst I live; And buried once, why not upon my head? Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin! We'll make foul weather with despised tears; Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn, And make a dearth in this revolting land. Or shall we play the wantons with our woes, And make some pretty match with shedding tears? As thus, to drop them still upon one place, Till they have fretted us a pair of graves Within the earth; and, therein laid,—there lies Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes. Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see I talk but idly, and you laugh at me. Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland, What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty Give Richard leave to live till Richard die? You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
My lord, in the base court he doth attendTo speak with you; may it please you to come down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon, Wanting the manage of unruly jades. In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, To come at traitors' calls and do them grace. In the base court? Come down? Down, court! down, king! For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.
What says his majesty?
Sorrow and grief of heart Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man Yet he is come.
Stand all apart,And show fair duty to his majesty.
My gracious lord,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee To make the base earth proud with kissing it: Me rather had my heart might feel your love Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know, Thus high at least, although your knee be low.
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,As my true service shall deserve your love.
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have, That know the strong'st and surest way to get. Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes; Tears show their love, but want their remedies. Cousin, I am too young to be your father, Though you are old enough to be my heir. What you will have, I'll give, and willing too; For do we must what force will have us do. Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yea, my good lord.
Then I must not say no.
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,To drive away the heavy thought of care?
Madam, we'll play at bowls.
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,And that my fortune rubs against the bias.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, we'll dance.
My legs can keep no measure in delight, When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief: Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
Of sorrow or of joy?
Of either, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of neither, girl: For of joy, being altogether wanting, It doth remember me the more of sorrow; Or if of grief, being altogether had, It adds more sorrow to my want of joy: For what I have I need not to repeat; And what I want it boots not to complain.
Madam, I'll sing.
'Tis well that thou hast causeBut thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,And never borrow any tear of thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But stay, here come the gardeners: Let's step into the shadow of these trees. My wretchedness unto a row of pins, They'll talk of state; for every one doth so Against a change ; woe is forerun with woe.
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks, Which, like unruly children, make their sire Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight: Give some supportance to the bending twigs. Go thou, and like an executioner, Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, That look too lofty in our commonwealth: All must be even in our government. You thus employ'd, I will go root away The noisome weeds, which without profit suck The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
Why should we in the compass of a pale Keep law and form and due proportion, Showing, as in a model, our firm estate, When our sea-walled garden, the whole land, Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up, Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd, Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs Swarming with caterpillars?
Hold thy peace: He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf: The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter, That seem'd in eating him to hold him up, Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke, I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
What, are they dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They are; and Bolingbroke Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land As we this garden! We at time of year Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees, Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood, With too much riches it confound itself: Had he done so to great and growing men, They might have lived to bear and he to taste Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches We lop away, that bearing boughs may live: Had he done so, himself had borne the crown, Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?
Depress'd he is already, and deposed 'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's, That tell black tidings.
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden, How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news? What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee To make a second fall of cursed man? Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed? Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth, Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how, Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon me, madam: little joy have I To breathe this news; yet what I say is true. King Richard, he is in the mighty hold Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd: In your lord's scale is nothing but himself, And some few vanities that make him light; But in the balance of great Bolingbroke, Besides himself, are all the English peers, And with that odds he weighs King Richard down. Post you to London, and you will find it so; I speak no more than every one doth know.
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, Doth not thy embassage belong to me, And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st To serve me last, that I may longest keep Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go, To meet at London London's king in woe. What, was I born to this, that my sad look Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke? Gardener, for telling me these news of woe, Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse, I would my skill were subject to thy curse. Here did she fall a tear; here in this place I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace: Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen, In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
Call forth Bagot. Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind; What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death, Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd The bloody office of his timeless end.
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd. In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted, I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length, That reacheth from the restful English court As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?' Amongst much other talk, that very time, I heard you say that you had rather refuse The offer of an hundred thousand crowns Than Bolingbroke's return to England; Adding withal how blest this land would be In this your cousin's death.
Princes and noble lords, What answer shall I make to this base man? Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars, On equal terms to give him chastisement? Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd With the attainder of his slanderous lips. There is my gage, the manual seal of death, That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest, And will maintain what thou hast said is false In thy heart-blood, though being all too base To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
Excepting one, I would he were the bestIn all this presence that hath moved me so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If that thy valour stand on sympathy, There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine: By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st, I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death. If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest; And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart, Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true In this appeal as thou art all unjust; And that thou art so, there I throw my gage, To prove it on thee to the extremest point Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]An if I do not, may my hands rot offAnd never brandish more revengeful steelOver the glittering helmet of my foe!
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle; And spur thee on with full as many lies As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn; Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all: I have a thousand spirits in one breast, To answer twenty thousand such as you.
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember wellThe very time Aumerle and you did talk.
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;And you can witness with me this is true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
Surrey, thou liest.
Dishonourable boy! That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword, That it shall render vengeance and revenge Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie In earth as quiet as thy father's skull: In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn; Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse! If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live, I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness, And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies, And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith, To tie thee to my strong correction. As I intend to thrive in this new world, Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal: Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men To execute the noble duke at Calais.
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this, If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These differences shall all rest under gage Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be, And, though mine enemy, restored again To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd, Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen. Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field, Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens: And toil'd with works of war, retired himself To Italy; and there at Venice gave His body to that pleasant country's earth, And his pure soul unto his captain Christ, Under whose colours he had fought so long.
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
As surely as I live, my lord.
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants, Your differences shall all rest under gage Till we assign you to your days of trial.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee From plume-pluck'd Richard; who with willing soul Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields To the possession of thy royal hand: Ascend his throne, descending now from him; And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Marry. God forbid! Worst in this royal presence may I speak, Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth. Would God that any in this noble presence Were enough noble to be upright judge Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. What subject can give sentence on his king? And who sits here that is not Richard's subject? Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear, Although apparent guilt be seen in them; And shall the figure of God's majesty, His captain, steward, deputy-elect, Anointed, crowned, planted many years, Be judged by subject and inferior breath, And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God, That in a Christian climate souls refined Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king: My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king, Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king: And if you crown him, let me prophesy: The blood of English shall manure the ground, And future ages groan for this foul act; Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels, And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound; Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls. O, if you raise this house against this house, It will the woefullest division prove That ever fell upon this cursed earth. Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so, Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains, Of capital treason we arrest you here. My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge To keep him safely till his day of trial. May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view He may surrender; so we shall proceed Without suspicion.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will be his conduct.
Lords, you that here are under our arrest, Procure your sureties for your days of answer. Little are we beholding to your love, And little look'd for at your helping hands.
Alack, why am I sent for to a king, Before I have shook off the regal thoughts Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs: Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me To this submission. Yet I well remember The favours of these men: were they not mine? Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me? So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve, Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none. God save the king! Will no man say amen? Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen. God save the king! although I be not he; And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me. To do what service am I sent for hither?
To do that office of thine own good willWhich tired majesty did make thee offer,The resignation of thy state and crownTo Henry Bolingbroke.
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown; Here cousin: On this side my hand, and on that side yours. Now is this golden crown like a deep well That owes two buckets, filling one another, The emptier ever dancing in the air, The other down, unseen and full of water: That bucket down and full of tears am I, Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thought you had been willing to resign.
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine: You may my glories and my state depose, But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down. My care is loss of care, by old care done; Your care is gain of care, by new care won: The cares I give I have, though given away; They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
Are you contented to resign the crown?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be; Therefore no no, for I resign to thee. Now mark me, how I will undo myself; I give this heavy weight from off my head And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand, The pride of kingly sway from out my heart; With mine own tears I wash away my balm, With mine own hands I give away my crown, With mine own tongue deny my sacred state, With mine own breath release all duty's rites: All pomp and majesty I do forswear; My manors, rents, revenues I forego; My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny: God pardon all oaths that are broke to me! God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee! Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved! Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit, And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit! God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says, And send him many years of sunshine days! What more remains?
No more, but that you read These accusations and these grievous crimes Committed by your person and your followers Against the state and profit of this land; That, by confessing them, the souls of men May deem that you are worthily deposed.
Must I do so? and must I ravel out My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland, If thy offences were upon record, Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst, There shouldst thou find one heinous article, Containing the deposing of a king And cracking the strong warrant of an oath, Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven: Nay, all of you that stand and look upon, Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross, And water cannot wash away your sin .
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see: And yet salt water blinds them not so much But they can see a sort of traitors here. Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself, I find myself a traitor with the rest; For I have given here my soul's consent To undeck the pompous body of a king; Made glory base and sovereignty a slave, Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord,—
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man, Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title, No, not that name was given me at the font, But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day, That I have worn so many winters out, And know not now what name to call myself! O that I were a mockery king of snow, Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke, To melt myself away in water-drops! Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, An if my word be sterling yet in England, Let it command a mirror hither straight, That it may show me what a face I have, Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
The commons will not then be satisfied.
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,When I do see the very book indeedWhere all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read. No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck So many blows upon this face of mine, And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass, Like to my followers in prosperity, Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face That every day under his household roof Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face That, like the sun, did make beholders wink? Was this the face that faced so many follies, And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke? A brittle glory shineth in this face: As brittle as the glory is the face;
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers. Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport, How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'dThe shadow of your face.
Say that again. The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see: 'Tis very true, my grief lies all within; And these external manners of laments Are merely shadows to the unseen grief That swells with silence in the tortured soul; There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king, For thy great bounty, that not only givest Me cause to wail but teachest me the way How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon, And then be gone and trouble you no more. Shall I obtain it?
Name it, fair cousin.
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king: For when I was a king, my flatterers Were then but subjects; being now a subject, I have a king here to my flatterer. Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Yet ask.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And shall I have?
You shall.
Then give me leave to go.
Whither?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
On Wednesday next we solemnly set downOur coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You holy clergymen, is there no plotTo rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
My lord, Before I freely speak my mind herein, You shall not only take the sacrament To bury mine intents, but also to effect Whatever I shall happen to devise. I see your brows are full of discontent, Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears: Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay A plot shall show us all a merry day.
This way the king will come; this is the way To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower, To whose flint bosom my condemned lord Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke: Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth Have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see, My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold, That you in pity may dissolve to dew, And wash him fresh again with true-love tears. Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand, Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb, And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn, Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee, When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so, To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul, To think our former state a happy dream; From which awaked, the truth of what we are Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet, To grim Necessity, and he and I Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France And cloister thee in some religious house: Our holy lives must win a new world's crown, Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, is my Richard both in shape and mind Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart? The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage To be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like, Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod, And fawn on rage with base humility, Which art a lion and a king of beasts?
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts, I had been still a happy king of men. Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France: Think I am dead and that even here thou takest, As from my death-bed, thy last living leave. In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire With good old folks and let them tell thee tales Of woeful ages long ago betid; And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs, Tell thou the lamentable tale of me And send the hearers weeping to their beds : For why, the senseless brands will sympathize The heavy accent of thy moving tongue And in compassion weep the fire out; And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black, For the deposing of a rightful king.
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;With all swift speed you must away to France.
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne, The time shall not be many hours of age More than it is ere foul sin gathering head Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think, Though he divide the realm and give thee half, It is too little, helping him to all; And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again, Being ne'er so little urged, another way To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne. The love of wicked men converts to fear; That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both To worthy danger and deserved death.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me, And then betwixt me and my married wife. Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me; And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made. Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north, Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime; My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp, She came adorned hither like sweet May, Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
And must we be divided? must we part?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
That were some love but little policy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
So two, together weeping, make one woe. Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here; Better far off than near, be ne'er the near. Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short, And piece the way out with a heavy heart. Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief; One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part; Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part To take on me to keep and kill thy heart. So, now I have mine own again, be gone, That I might strive to kill it with a groan.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We make woe wanton with this fond delay:Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest, When weeping made you break the story off, of our two cousins coming into London.
Where did I leave?
At that sad stop, my lord, Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke, Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know, With slow but stately pace kept on his course, Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee, Bolingbroke!' You would have thought the very windows spake, So many greedy looks of young and old Through casements darted their desiring eyes Upon his visage, and that all the walls With painted imagery had said at once 'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!' Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning, Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck, Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:' And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
As in a theatre, the eyes of men, After a well-graced actor leaves the stage, Are idly bent on him that enters next, Thinking his prattle to be tedious; Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!' No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home: But dust was thrown upon his sacred head: Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off, His face still combating with tears and smiles, The badges of his grief and patience, That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted And barbarism itself have pitied him. But heaven hath a hand in these events, To whose high will we bound our calm contents. To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Aumerle that was; But that is lost for being Richard's friend, And, madam, you must call him Rutland now: I am in parliament pledge for his truth And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
Welcome, my son: who are the violets nowThat strew the green lap of the new come spring?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:God knows I had as lief be none as one.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time, Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime. What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
You will be there, I know.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.
My lord, 'tis nothing.
No matter, then, who see it;I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
I do beseech your grace to pardon me: It is a matter of small consequence, Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.I fear, I fear,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What should you fear? 'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool. Boy, let me see the writing.
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter, my lord?
Ho! who is within there?
Saddle my horse.God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
Why, what is it, my lord?
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse. Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth, I will appeach the villain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter?
Peace, foolish woman.
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.
Good mother, be content; it is no moreThan my poor life must answer.
Thy life answer!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
Give me my boots, I say.
Why, York, what wilt thou do? Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own? Have we more sons? or are we like to have? Is not my teeming date drunk up with time? And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age, And rob me of a happy mother's name? Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
Thou fond mad woman, Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy? A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament, And interchangeably set down their hands, To kill the king at Oxford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He shall be none;We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,I would appeach him.
Hadst thou groan'd for him As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful. But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect That I have been disloyal to thy bed, And that he is a bastard, not thy son: Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind: He is as like thee as a man may be, Not like to me, or any of my kin, And yet I love him.
Make way, unruly woman!
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse; Spur post, and get before him to the king, And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee. I'll not be long behind; though I be old, I doubt not but to ride as fast as York: And never will I rise up from the ground Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son? 'Tis full three months since I did see him last; If any plague hang over us, 'tis he. I would to God, my lords, he might be found: Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there, For there, they say, he daily doth frequent, With unrestrained loose companions, Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes, And beat our watch, and rob our passengers; Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy, Takes on the point of honour to support So dissolute a crew.
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
And what said the gallant?
His answer was, he would unto the stews, And from the common'st creature pluck a glove, And wear it as a favour; and with that He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
As dissolute as desperate; yet through both I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is the king?
What means our cousin, that he stares and looksSo wildly?
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,To have some conference with your grace alone.
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cousin now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For ever may my knees grow to the earth,My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouthUnless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
Intended or committed was this fault? If on the first, how heinous e'er it be, To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,That no man enter till my tale be done.
Have thy desire.
[Within] My liege, beware; look to thyself;Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Villain, I'll make thee safe.
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
[Within] Open the door, secure, foolhardy king: Shall I for love speak treason to thy face? Open the door, or I will break it open.
What is the matter, uncle? speak; Recover breath; tell us how near is danger, That we may arm us to encounter it.
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt knowThe treason that my haste forbids me show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd: I do repent me; read not my name there My heart is not confederate with my hand.
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down. I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king; Fear, and not love, begets his penitence: Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy ! O loyal father of a treacherous son! Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain, From when this stream through muddy passages Hath held his current and defiled himself! Thy overflow of good converts to bad, And thy abundant goodness shall excuse This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd; And he shall spend mine honour with his shame, As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold. Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies, Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies: Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath, The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
[Within] What ho, my liege! for God's sake,let me in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.Speak with me, pity me, open the door.A beggar begs that never begg'd before.
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray, More sins for this forgiveness prosper may. This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound; This let alone will all the rest confound.
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!Love loving not itself none other can.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.
Rise up, good aunt.
Not yet, I thee beseech: For ever will I walk upon my knees, And never see day that the happy sees, Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy, By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Against them both my true joints bended be.Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face; His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest; His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast: He prays but faintly and would be denied; We pray with heart and soul and all beside: His weary joints would gladly rise, I know; Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow: His prayers are full of false hypocrisy; Ours of true zeal and deep integrity. Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
Good aunt, stand up.
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;' Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.' And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech. I never long'd to hear a word till now; Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how: The word is short, but not so short as sweet; No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy? Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord, That set'st the word itself against the word! Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land; The chopping French we do not understand. Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there; Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear; That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce, Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
Good aunt, stand up.
I do not sue to stand;Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee! Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again; Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain, But makes one pardon strong.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heartI pardon him.
A god on earth thou art.
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, With all the rest of that consorted crew, Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels. Good uncle, help to order several powers To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are: They shall not live within this world, I swear, But I will have them, if I once know where. Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu: Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.
Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, 'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?' Was it not so?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These were his very words.
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,And urged it twice together, did he not?
He did.
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me, And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man' That would divorce this terror from my heart;' Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go: I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.
I have been studying how I may compare This prison where I live unto the world: And for because the world is populous And here is not a creature but myself, I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out. My brain I'll prove the female to my soul, My soul the father; and these two beget A generation of still-breeding thoughts, And these same thoughts people this little world, In humours like the people of this world, For no thought is contented. The better sort, As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd With scruples and do set the word itself Against the word: As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again, 'It is as hard to come as for a camel To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.' Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails May tear a passage through the flinty ribs Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls, And, for they cannot, die in their own pride. Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves That they are not the first of fortune's slaves, Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, That many have and others must sit there; And in this thought they find a kind of ease, Bearing their own misfortunes on the back Of such as have before endured the like. Thus play I in one person many people, And none contented: sometimes am I king; Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar, And so I am: then crushing penury Persuades me I was better when a king; Then am I king'd again: and by and by Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke, And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be, Nor I nor any man that but man is With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased With being nothing. Music do I hear?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is, When time is broke and no proportion kept! So is it in the music of men's lives. And here have I the daintiness of ear To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string; But for the concord of my state and time Had not an ear to hear my true time broke. I wasted time, and now doth time waste me; For now hath time made me his numbering clock: My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, Whereto my finger, like a dial's point, Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears. Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy, While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock. This music mads me; let it sound no more; For though it have helped madmen to their wits, In me it seems it will make wise men mad. Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me! For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
Hail, royal prince!
Thanks, noble peer; The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear. What art thou? and how comest thou hither, Where no man never comes but that sad dog That brings me food to make misfortune live?
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king, When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York, With much ado at length have gotten leave To look upon my sometimes royal master's face. O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld In London streets, that coronation-day, When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary, That horse that thou so often hast bestrid, That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,How went he under him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back! That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand; This hand hath made him proud with clapping him. Would he not stumble? would he not fall down, Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck Of that proud man that did usurp his back? Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee, Since thou, created to be awed by man, Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse; And yet I bear a burthen like an ass, Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, will't please you to fall to?
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, wholately came from the king, commands the contrary.
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
Help, help, help!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! what means death in this rude assault?Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land. Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high; Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
As full of valour as of royal blood: Both have I spill'd; O would the deed were good! For now the devil, that told me I did well, Says that this deed is chronicled in hell. This dead king to the living king I'll bear Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear Is that the rebels have consumed with fire Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire; But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Welcome, my lord what is the news?
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness. The next news is, I have to London sent The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent: The manner of their taking may appear At large discoursed in this paper here.
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely, Two of the dangerous consorted traitors That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster, With clog of conscience and sour melancholy Hath yielded up his body to the grave; But here is Carlisle living, to abide Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
Carlisle, this is your doom: Choose out some secret place, some reverend room, More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life; So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife: For though mine enemy thou hast ever been, High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.
Great king, within this coffin I present Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies The mightiest of thy greatest enemies, Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought A deed of slander with thy fatal hand Upon my head and all this famous land.
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They love not poison that do poison need, Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead, I hate the murderer, love him murdered. The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, But neither my good word nor princely favour: With Cain go wander through shades of night, And never show thy head by day nor light. Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe, That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow: Come, mourn with me for that I do lament, And put on sullen black incontinent: I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land, To wash this blood off from my guilty hand: March sadly after; grace my mournings here; In weeping after this untimely bier.
Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this son of York, And all the clouds that loured upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths, Our bruisèd arms hung up for monuments, Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, Our dreadful marches to delightful measures. Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front; And now, instead of mounting barbèd steeds To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamber To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, Nor made to court an amorous looking glass; I, that am rudely stamped and want love’s majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them— Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, Have no delight to pass away the time, Unless to see my shadow in the sun And descant on mine own deformity. And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover To entertain these fair well-spoken days, I am determinèd to prove a villain And hate the idle pleasures of these days. Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, To set my brother Clarence and the king In deadly hate, the one against the other; And if King Edward be as true and just As I am subtle, false, and treacherous, This day should Clarence closely be mewed up About a prophecy which says that “G” Of Edward’s heirs the murderer shall be. Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day. What means this armèd guardThat waits upon your Grace?
His majesty,Tend'ring my person’s safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Upon what cause?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Because my name is George.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours. He should, for that, commit your godfathers. O, belike his majesty hath some intent That you shall be new christened in the Tower. But what’s the matter, Clarence? May I know?
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest As yet I do not. But, as I can learn, He hearkens after prophecies and dreams, And from the crossrow plucks the letter "G", And says a wizard told him that by “G” His issue disinherited should be. And for my name of George begins with "G", It follows in his thought that I am he. These, as I learn, and such like toys as these Have moved his Highness to commit me now.
Why, this it is when men are ruled by women. 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower. My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, ’tis she That tempers him to this extremity. Was it not she and that good man of worship, Anthony Woodeville, her brother there, That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, From whence this present day he is delivered? We are not safe, Clarence. We are not safe.
By heaven, I think there is no man is secure But the queen’s kindred and night-walking heralds That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. Heard ye not what an humble suppliant Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Humbly complaining to her deity Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty. I’ll tell you what: I think it is our way, If we will keep in favor with the king, To be her men and wear her livery. The jealous o'erworn widow and herself, Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen, Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me. His majesty hath straitly given in charge That no man shall have private conference, Of what degree soever, with his brother.
Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury, You may partake of anything we say. We speak no treason, man. We say the king Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous. We say that Shore’s wife hath a pretty foot, A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue, And that the queen’s kindred are made gentlefolks. How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee, fellow,He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What one, my lord?
Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the queen’s abjects and must obey.— Brother, farewell. I will unto the king, And whatsoe'er you will employ me in, Were it to call King Edward’s widow “sister,” I will perform it to enfranchise you. Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.I will deliver you or else lie for you.Meantime, have patience.
I must perforce. Farewell.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, If heaven will take the present at our hands. But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain. Well are you welcome to the open air.How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must.But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanksThat were the cause of my imprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,For they that were your enemies are hisAnd have prevailed as much on him as you.
More pity that the eagle should be mewedWhile kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
What news abroad?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No news so bad abroad as this at home:The king is sickly, weak and melancholy,And his physicians fear him mightily.
Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed. O, he hath kept an evil diet long, And overmuch consumed his royal person. 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. Where is he, in his bed?
He is.
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven. I’ll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence With lies well steeled with weighty arguments, And, if I fail not in my deep intent, Clarence hath not another day to live; Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy, And leave the world for me to bustle in. For then I’ll marry Warwick’s youngest daughter. What though I killed her husband and her father? The readiest way to make the wench amends Is to become her husband and her father; The which will I, not all so much for love As for another secret close intent By marrying her which I must reach unto. But yet I run before my horse to market. Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns. When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Set down, set down your honorable load, If honor may be shrouded in a hearse, Whilst I awhile obsequiously lamentTh' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king, Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster, Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost To hear the lamentations of poor Anne, Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son, Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. O, cursèd be the hand that made these holes; Cursèd the heart that had the heart to do it; Cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence. More direful hap betide that hated wretch That makes us wretched by the death of thee Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads, Or any creeping venomed thing that lives. If ever he have child, abortive be it, Prodigious, and untimely brought to light, Whose ugly and unnatural aspect May fright the hopeful mother at the view, And that be heir to his unhappiness. If ever he have wife, let her be made More miserable by the death of him Than I am made by my poor lord and thee.— Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load, Taken from Paul’s to be interrèd there.
And still, as you are weary of this weight,Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry’s corse.
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
What black magician conjures up this fiend To stop devoted charitable deeds?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,I’ll make a corse of him that disobeys.
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!— Advance thy halberd higher than my breast, Or by Saint Paul I’ll strike thee to my foot And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
[to gentlemen and halberds] What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid? Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal, And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.— Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell. Thou hadst but power over his mortal body; His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Foul devil, for God’s sake, hence, and trouble us not, For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
O, gentlemen, see, see dead Henry’s wounds Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!— Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity, For ’tis thy presence that exhales this blood From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells. Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural, Provokes this deluge most unnatural.— O God, which this blood mad’st, revenge his death! O earth, which this blood drink’st revenge his death! Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead, Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick, As thou dost swallow up this good king’s blood, Which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd!
Lady, you know no rules of charity,Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
Villain, thou know’st not law of God nor man.No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
More wonderful, when angels are so angry. Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, Of these supposèd crimes to give me leave By circumstance but to acquit myself.
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,Of these known evils but to give me leave By circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me haveSome patient leisure to excuse myself.
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst makeNo excuse current but to hang thyself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By such despair I should accuse myself.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excusedFor doing worthy vengeance on thyselfThat didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
Say that I slew them not.
Then say they were not slain. But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.
I did not kill your husband.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, he is alive.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward’s hands.
In thy foul throat thou liest. Queen Margaret saw Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood, The which thou once didst bend against her breast, But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
I was provokèd by her sland'rous tongue,That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
Thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind, That never dream’st on aught but butcheries.Didst thou not kill this king?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I grant you.
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me tooThou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed.O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither,For he was fitter for that place than earth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And thou unfit for any place but hell.
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
Some dungeon.
Your bedchamber.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So will it, madam till I lie with you.
I hope so.
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne, To leave this keen encounter of our wits And fall something into a slower method— Is not the causer of the timeless deaths Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward, As blameful as the executioner?
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect— Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep To undertake the death of all the world, So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
These eyes could never endure that beauty’s wrack. You should not blemish it, if I stood by. As all the world is cheerèd by the sun, So I by that. It is my day, my life.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.
Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is a quarrel most unnatural To be revenged on him that loveth thee.
It is a quarrel just and reasonableTo be revenged on him that killed my husband.
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husbandDid it to help thee to a better husband.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Name him.
Plantagenet.
Why, that was he.
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.
Where is he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.
I would they were, that I might die at once, For now they kill me with a living death. Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops. These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear— No, when my father York and Edward wept To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him; Nor when thy warlike father, like a child, Told the sad story of my father’s death And twenty times made pause to sob and weep, That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks Like trees bedashed with rain—in that sad time, My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear; And what these sorrows could not thence exhale Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. I never sued to friend, nor enemy; My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word. But now thy beauty is proposed my fee, My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made For kissing, lady, not for such contempt. If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, Which if thou please to hide in this true breast And let the soul forth that adoreth thee, I lay it naked to the deadly stroke And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry— But ’twas thy beauty that provokèd me. Nay, now dispatch; ’twas I that stabbed young Edward— But ’twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take up the sword again, or take up me.
Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,I will not be the executioner.
[rising] Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
I have already.
That was in thy rage. Speak it again and, even with the word, This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love, Shall for thy love kill a far truer love. To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would I knew thy heart.
'Tis figured in my tongue.
I fear me both are false.
Then never man was man true.
Well, well, put up your sword.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say then my peace is made.
That shall you know hereafter.
But shall I live in hope?
All men I hope live so.
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To take is not to give.
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger; Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart. Wear both of them, for both of them are thine. And if thy poor devoted servant may But beg one favor at thy gracious hand, Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
What is it?
That it would please you leave these sad designs To him that hath more cause to be a mourner, And presently repair to Crosby House, Where, after I have solemnly interred At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king And wet his grave with my repentant tears, I will with all expedient duty see you. For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you, Grant me this boon.
With all my heart, and much it joys me tooTo see you are become so penitent.—Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bid me farewell.
'Tis more than you deserve; But since you teach me how to flatter you,Imagine I have said “farewell” already.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was ever woman in this humor wooed? Was ever woman in this humor won? I’ll have her, but I will not keep her long. What, I that killed her husband and his father, To take her in her heart’s extremest hate, With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, The bleeding witness of my hatred by, Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me, And I no friends to back my suit at all But the plain devil and dissembling looks? And yet to win her, all the world to nothing! Ha! Hath she forgot already that brave prince, Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury? A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman, Framed in the prodigality of nature, Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, The spacious world cannot again afford. And will she yet abase her eyes on me, That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince And made her widow to a woeful bed? On me, whose all not equals Edward’s moiety? On me, that halts and am misshapen thus? My dukedom to a beggarly denier, I do mistake my person all this while! Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot, Myself to be a marv'lous proper man. I’ll be at charges for a looking glass And entertain a score or two of tailors To study fashions to adorn my body. Since I am crept in favor with myself, I will maintain it with some little cost. But first I’ll turn yon fellow in his grave And then return lamenting to my love. Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass, That I may see my shadow as I pass.
Have patience, madam. There’s no doubt his majestyWill soon recover his accustomed health.
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.Therefore, for God’s sake, entertain good comfort And cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son To be your comforter when he is gone.
Ah, he is young, and his minorityIs put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,A man that loves not me nor none of you.
Is it concluded that he shall be Protector?
It is determined, not concluded yet;But so it must be if the king miscarry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Good time of day unto your royal Grace.
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.
The countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby, To your good prayer will scarcely say amen. Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she’s your wife And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
I do beseech you either not believe The envious slanders of her false accusers, Or if she be accused in true report, Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw you the king today, my lord of Derby?
But now the duke of Buckingham and IAre come from visiting his majesty.
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
Madam, good hope. His grace speaks cheerfully.
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement Betwixt the duke of Gloucester and your brothers, And betwixt them and my Lord Chamberlain, And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
Would all were well—but that will never be.I fear our happiness is at the height.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it! Who is it that complains unto the king That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not? By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors. Because I cannot flatter and look fair, Smile in men’s faces, smooth, deceive and cog, Duck with French nods and apish courtesy, I must be held a rancorous enemy. Cannot a plain man live and think no harm, But thus his simple truth must be abused With silken, sly, insinuating jacks?
To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace?
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?— Or thee?—Or thee? Or any of your faction? A plague upon you all! His royal grace, Whom God preserve better than you would wish, Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter. The king, on his own royal disposition, And not provoked by any suitor else, Aiming belike at your interior hatred That in your outward actions shows itself Against my children, brothers, and myself, Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground Of your ill will, and thereby to remove it.
I cannot tell. The world is grown so bad That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. Since every jack became a gentleman, There’s many a gentle person made a jack.
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester. You envy my advancement, and my friends'.God grant we never may have need of you.
Meantime God grants that we have need of you. Our brother is imprisoned by your means, Myself disgraced, and the nobility Held in contempt, while great promotions Are daily given to ennoble those That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
By Him that raised me to this careful height From that contented hap which I enjoyed, I never did incense his majesty Against the duke of Clarence, but have been An earnest advocate to plead for him. My lord, you do me shameful injury Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may deny that you were not the meanOf my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
She may, my lord, for—
She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so? She may do more, sir, than denying that. She may help you to many fair preferments And then deny her aiding hand therein, And lay those honors on your high desert. What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she—
What, marry, may she?
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,A bachelor, a handsome stripling too.I wis, your grandam had a worser match.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs. By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty With those gross taunts that oft I have endured. I had rather be a country servant-maid Than a great queen with this condition, To be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.
Small joy have I in being England’s queen.
[aside] And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] What, threat you me with telling of the king? Tell him, and spare not. Look, what I have said, I will avouch ’t in presence of the king; I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tower. 'Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.
[aside] Out, devil! I do remember them too well:Thou killed’st my husband Henry in the Tower, And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king, I was a packhorse in his great affairs, A weeder-out of his proud adversaries, A liberal rewarder of his friends. To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
[aside] Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] In all which time, you and your husband Grey Were factious for the house of Lancaster.— And, Rivers, so were you.— Was not your husband In Margaret’s battle at Saint Albans slain? Let me put in your minds, if you forget, What you have been ere this, and what you are; Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
[aside] A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,Ay, and forswore himself—which Jesu pardon!—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Which God revenge!
To fight on Edward’s party for the crown; And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up. I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward’s, Or Edward’s soft and pitiful, like mine. I am too childish-foolish for this world.
[aside] Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days Which here you urge to prove us enemies, We followed then our lord, our sovereign king. So should we you, if you should be our king.
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler. Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As little joy, my lord, as you suppose You should enjoy were you this country’s king, As little joy may you suppose in me That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
[aside] Ah, little joy enjoys the queen thereof,For I am she, and altogether joyless.I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out In sharing that which you have pilled from me! Which of you trembles not that looks on me? If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects, Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.— Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
Foul, wrinkled witch, what mak’st thou in my sight?
But repetition of what thou hast marred.That will I make before I let thee go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?
I was, but I do find more pain in banishment Than death can yield me here by my abode. A husband and a son thou ow’st to me; [to QUEEN ELIZABETH] And thou a kingdom; — all of you, allegiance. The sorrow that I have by right is yours, And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
The curse my noble father laid on thee When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper, And with thy scorns drew’st rivers from his eyes, And then, to dry them, gav’st the duke a clout Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland— His curses then, from bitterness of soul Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee, And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God to right the innocent.
O, ’twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
What, were you snarling all before I came, Ready to catch each other by the throat, And turn you all your hatred now on me? Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with heaven That Henry’s death, my Lovelly Edward’s death, Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment, Could all but answer for that peevish brat? Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! Though not by war, by surfeit die your king, As ours by murder to make him a king. [to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales, For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales, Die in his youth by like untimely violence. Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, Outlive they glory, like my wretched self. Long mayst thou live to wail they children's death And see another, as I see thee now, Decked in they rights, as thou art stalled in mine. Long die thy happy days before they death, And, after many lengthened hours of grief, Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen. Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by, And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God I pray Him That none of you may live his natural age, But by some unlooked accident cut off.
Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. If heaven have any grievous plague in store Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe And then hurl down their indignation On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace. The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul. Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv’st, And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends. No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, Unless it be while some tormenting dream Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils. Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog, Thou was sealed in they nativity The slave of nature and the son of hell, Thou slander of they heavy mother's womb, Thou loathed issue of they father's loins, Thou rag of honor, thou detested—
Margaret.
Richard!
Ha?
I call thee not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cry thee mercy, then, for I did thinkThat thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.O, let me make the period to my curse!
'Tis done by me, and ends in “Margaret.”
[to QUEEN MARGARET] Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune, Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider, Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? Fool, fool, thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself. The day will come that thou shalt wish for me To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-backed toad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty: Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
[to RIVERS] Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert. Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current. O, that your young nobility could judge What ’twere to lose it and be miserable! They that stand high have many blasts to shake them, And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Good counsel, marry. —Learn it, learn it, marquess.
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high.Our aerie buildeth in the cedar’s top,And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas, Witness my son, now in the shade of death, Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath Hath in eternal darkness folded up. Your aerie buildeth in our aerie’s nest. O God, that seest it, do not suffer it! As it was won with blood, lost be it so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me. [addressing the others] Uncharitably with me have you dealt, And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered. My charity is outrage, life my shame, And in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.
Have done, have done.
O princely Buckingham, I’ll kiss thy hand In sign of league and amity with thee. Now fair befall thee and thy noble house! Thy garments are not spotted with our blood, Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Nor no one here, for curses never passThe lips of those that breathe them in the air.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will not think but they ascend the sky, And there awake God’s gentle-sleeping peace. [aside to BUCKINGHAM] O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog! Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, His venom tooth will rankle to the death. Have naught to do with him. Beware of him. Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him, And all their ministers attend on him.
What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel, And soothe the devil that I warn thee from? O, but remember this another day, When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.— Live each of you the subjects to his hate, And he to yours, and all of you to God’s.
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And so doth mine. I muse why she’s at liberty.
I cannot blame her. By God’s holy mother, She hath had too much wrong, and I repentMy part thereof that I have done to her.
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. I was too hot to do somebody good That is too cold in thinking of it now. Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid; He is franked up to fatting for his pains. God pardon them that are the cause thereof.
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So do I ever [aside] being well-advised,For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,—And for your Grace, —and yours, my gracious lords.
Catesby, I come. —Lords, will you go with me?
We wait upon your Grace.
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl. The secret mischiefs that I set abroach I lay unto the grievous charge of others. Clarence, whom I indeed have cast in darkness, I do beweep to many simple gulls, Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham, And tell them ’tis the queen and her allies That stir the king against the duke my brother. Now they believe it and withal whet me To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey; But then I sigh and, with a piece of scripture, Tell them that God bids us do good for evil; And thus I clothe my naked villainy With odd old ends stolen out of Holy Writ, And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But, soft! here come my executioners.—How now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates?Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrantThat we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought upon. I have it here about me. [He gives a paper] When you have done, repair to Crosby Place. But, sirs, be sudden in the execution, Withal obdurate; do not hear him plead, For Clarence is well-spoken and perhaps May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.Talkers are no good doers. Be assured We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears.I like you lads. About your business straight.Go, go, dispatch.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will, my noble lord.
Why looks your grace so heavily today?
O, I have passed a miserable night, So full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights, That, as I am a Christian faithful man, I would not spend another such a night Though ’twere to buy a world of happy days, So full of dismal terror was the time.
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower And was embarked to cross to Burgundy, And in my company my brother Gloucester, Who from my cabin tempted me to walk Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward England And cited up a thousand fearful times, During the wars of York and Lancaster That had befall'n us. As we paced along Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard Into the tumbling billows of the main. O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown, What dreadful noise of waters in my ears, What sights of ugly death within my eyes. Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks, Ten thousand men that fishes gnawed upon, Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, All scattered in the bottom of the sea. Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept— as 'twere in scorn of eyes— reflecting gems, That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had you such leisure in the time of death To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Methought I had, and often did I strive To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood Stopped in my soul and would not let it forth To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air, But smothered it within my panting bulk, Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life. O, then began the tempest to my soul. I passed, methought, the melancholy flood, With that sour ferryman which poets write of, Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. The first that there did greet my stranger-soul Was my great father-in-law, renownèd Warwick, Who cried aloud, “What scourge for perjury Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?” And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by A shadow like an angel, with bright hair Dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud "Clarence is come—false, fleeting, perjured Clarence, That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury. Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment." With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends Environed me and howled in mine ears Such hideous cries that with the very noise I trembling waked, and for a season after Could not believe but that I was in hell, Such terrible impression made my dream.
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you. I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah keeper, keeper, I have done those things, That now give evidence against my soul, For Edward’s sake, and see how he requites me.— O God, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, Yet execute thy wrath in me alone! O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!— Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile. My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, Makes the night morning, and the noontide night. Princes have but their titles for their glories, An outward honor for an inward toil, And, for unfelt imaginations, They often feel a world of restless cares, So that betwixt their titles and low name There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
Ho, who’s here?
What wouldst thou, fellow? And how cam’st thou hither?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
What, so brief?
'Tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious.—Let him seeour commission, and talk no more.
I am in this commanded to deliver The noble duke of Clarence to your hands. I will not reason what is meant hereby Because I will be guiltless from the meaning. There lies the duke asleep, and there the keys. [He hands them the keys] I’ll to the king and signify to him That thus I have resigned my charge to you.
You may, sir. 'Tis a point of wisdom. Fare you well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?
No. He’ll say ’twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
Why, he shall never wake until the great Judgment Day.
Why, then he’ll say we stabbed him sleeping.
The urging of that word “judgment” hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, art thou afraid?
Not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
So I am—to let him live.
I’ll back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I prithee stay a little. I hope this passionate humor of mine will change. It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.
Remember our reward when the deed’s done.
Zounds, he dies! I had forgot the reward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where’s thy conscience now?
O, in the duke of Gloucester’s purse.
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.
'Tis no matter. Let it go. There’s few or none will entertain it.
What if it come to thee again?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll not meddle with it. It makes a man a coward: a mancannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbor’s wife but it detects him. 'Tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man’s bosom. It fills a man full of obstacles. It made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance I found. It beggars any man that keeps it. It is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.
Zounds, ’tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not tokill the duke.
Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
I am strong-framed. He cannot prevail with me.
Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.
O excellent device— and make a sop of him.
Soft, he wakes.
Strike!
No, we’ll reason with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
In God’s name, what art thou?
A man, as you are.
But not, as I am, royal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor you, as we are, loyal.
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
My voice is now the king’s, my looks mine own.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To, to, to—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To murder me?
Ay, ay.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
Offended us you have not, but the king.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men To slay the innocent? What is my offense? Where is the evidence that doth accuse me? What lawful quest have given their verdict up Unto the frowning judge? Or who pronounced The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death Before I be convict by course of law? To threaten me with death is most unlawful. I charge you, as you hope to have redemption, By Christ’s dear blood shed for our grievous sins, That you depart, and lay no hands on me. The deed you undertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And he that hath commanded is our king.
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings Hath in the tables of His law commanded That thou shalt do no murder. Will thou then Spurn at His edict and fulfill a man’s? Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand To hurl upon their heads that break His law.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee For false forswearing and for murder too. Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign’s son.
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
How canst thou urge God’s dreadful law to usWhen thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed? For Edward, for my brother, for his sake. He sends you not to murder me for this, For in that sin he is as deep as I. If God will be avengèd for this deed, O, know you yet He doth it publicly! Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm; He needs no indirect or lawless course To cut off those that have offended Him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who made thee then a bloody ministerWhen gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
My brother’s love, the devil, and my rage.
Thy brother’s love, our duty, and thy faultsProvoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
If you do love my brother, hate not me. I am his brother, and I love him well. If you are hired for meed, go back again, And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, Who shall reward you better for my life Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.Go you to him from me.
Ay, so we will.
Tell him, when that our princely father York Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm, And charged us from his soul to love each other, He little thought of this divided friendship. Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself.'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobsThat he would labor my delivery.
Why, so he doth, when he delivers youFrom this earth’s thralldom to the joys of heaven.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Have you that holy feeling in your souls To counsel me to make my peace with God, And art you yet to your own souls so blind That thou will war with God by murd'ring me? O sirs, consider: they that set you on To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to FIRST MURDERER] What shall we do?
Relent, and save your souls. Which of you—if you were a prince's son Being pent from liberty, as I am now— If two such murderers as yourselves came to you, Would you not entreat for life? Ay, you would beg, Were you in my distress.
Relent? No. 'Tis cowardly and womanish.
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. [to SECOND MURDERER] My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks. O, if thine eye be not a flatterer, Come thou on my side and entreat for me. A begging prince what beggar pities not?
Look behind you, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take that, and that. [stabs CLARENCE] If all this will not do,I’ll drown you in the malmsey butt within.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my handsOf this most grievous murder.
How now? What mean’st thou, that thou help’st me not?By heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.
I would he knew that I had saved his brother. Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,For I repent me that the duke is slain.
So do not I. Go, coward as thou art. Well, I’ll go hide the body in some hole Till that the duke give order for his burial. And when I have my meed, I will away, For this will out, and then I must not stay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, so. Now have I done a good day’s work. You peers, continue this united league. I every day expect an embassage From my Redeemer to redeem me hence, And more in peace my soul shall part to heaven Since I have made my friends at peace on earth Rivers and Hastings, take each other’s hand. Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.
[taking HASTINGS’s hand] By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate, And with my hand I seal my true heart’s love.
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
Take heed you dally not before your king, Lest He that is the supreme King of kings Confound your hidden falsehood, and award Either of you to be the other’s end.
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Madam, yourself is not exempt in this,— Nor you, son Dorset, —Buckingham, nor you. You have been factious one against the other.— Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand, And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
There, Hastings, I will never more rememberOur former hatred, so thrive I and mine.
Dorset, embrace him.—Hastings, love Lord Marquess.
This interchange of love, I here protest,Upon my part shall be inviolable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And so swear I.
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wife’s alliesAnd make me happy in your unity.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me With hate in those where I expect most love. When I have most need to employ a friend, And most assurèd that he is a friend, Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile Be he unto me: this do I beg of God When I am cold in love to you or yours.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham, Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart. There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here To make the blessèd period of this peace.
And in good time,Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the duke.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,And, princely peers, a happy time of day.
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day. Brother, we have done deeds of charity, Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate, Between these swelling, wrong-incensèd peers.
A blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord. Amongst this princely heap, if any here By false intelligence, or wrong surmise Hold me a foe, If I unwittingly, or in my rage, Have aught committed that is hardly borne By any in this presence, I desire To reconcile me to his friendly peace. 'Tis death to me to be at enmity; I hate it, and desire all good men’s love. First, madam, I entreat true peace of you, Which I will purchase with my duteous service;— Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham, If ever any grudge were lodged between us;— Of you, Lord Rivers, and Lord Gray of you, Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed of all! I do not know that Englishman alive With whom my soul is any jot at odds More than the infant that is born tonight. I thank my God for my humility.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter. I would to God all strifes were well compounded. My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
Why, madam, have I offered love for this,To be so flouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
Ay, my good lord, and no one in the presenceBut his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.
But he, poor man, by your first order died, And that a wingèd Mercury did bear. Some tardy cripple bear the countermand, That came too lag to see him burièd. God grant that some, less noble and less loyal, Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood, Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did, And yet go current from suspicion.
[kneeling] A boon, my sovereign, for my service done.
I prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then say at once what is it thou requests.
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant’s life,Who slew today a riotous gentlemanLately attendant on the duke of Norfolk.
Have I a tongue to doom my brother’s death, And shall the tongue give pardon to a slave? My brother killed no man; his fault was thought, And yet his punishment was bitter death. Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath, Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised? Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love? Who told me how the poor soul did forsake The mighty Warwick and did fight for me? Who told me, in the field by Tewkesbury, When Oxford had me down, he rescued me, And said “Dear brother, live, and be a king?” Who told me, when we both lay in the field Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me Even in his garments and did give himself, All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night? All this from my remembrance brutish wrath Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you Had so much grace to put it in my mind. But when your carters or your waiting vassals Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced The precious image of our dear Redeemer, You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon, And I, unjustly too, must grant it you. [STANLEY rises] But for my brother, not a man would speak, Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all Have been beholding to him in his life, Yet none of you would once beg for his life. O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold On me and you, and mine and yours for this!— Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.— Ah, poor Clarence.
This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not How that the guilty kindred of the queen Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death? O, they did urge it still unto the king. God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go To comfort Edward with our company?
We wait upon your Grace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
No, boy.
Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,And cry, “O Clarence, my unhappy son?”
Why do you look on us and shake your head,And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,If that our noble father were alive?
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both. I do lament the sickness of the king, As loath to lose him, not your father’s death. It were lost sorrow to wail one that’s lost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. The king mine uncle is to blame for it. God will revenge it, whom I will importune With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
And so will I.
Peace, children, peace. The king doth love you well.Incapable and shallow innocents,You cannot guess who caused your father’s death.
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester Told me the king, provoked to it by the queen, Devised impeachments to imprison him; And when my uncle told me so, he wept, And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek, Bade me rely on him as on my father, And he would love me dearly as a child.
Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape, And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice. He is my son, ay, and therein my shame, Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
Ay, boy.
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, To chide my fortune and torment myself? I’ll join with black despair against my soul And to myself become an enemy.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To make an act of tragic violence. Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead. Why grow the branches when the root is gone? Why wither not the leaves that want their sap? If you will live, lament. If die, be brief, That our swift-wingèd souls may catch the king’s, Or, like obedient subjects, follow him To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow As I had title in thy noble husband. I have bewept a worthy husband’s death And lived with looking on his images; But now two mirrors of his princely semblance Are cracked in pieces by malignant death, And I, for comfort, have but one false glass That grieves me when I see my shame in him. Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother, And hast the comfort of thy children left, But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands, Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I, Thine being but a moiety of my moan, To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father’s death.How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned. Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
G ive me no help in lamentation. I am not barren to bring forth complaints. All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, That I, being governed by the watery moon, May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world. Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
What stay had I but Edward? And he’s gone.
What stay had we but Clarence? And he’s gone.
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
Was never mother had so dear a loss. Alas, I am the mother of these griefs. Their woes are parceled; mine are general. She for an Edward weeps, and so do I; I for a Clarence weep; so doth not she. These babes for Clarence weep and so do I; I for an Edward weep; so do not they. Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed, Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow’s nurse, And I will pamper it with lamentations.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeased That you take with unthankfulness, his doing. In common worldly things, ’tis called ungrateful With dull unwillingness to repay a debt Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent; Much more to be thus opposite with heaven, For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him. Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives. Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward’s grave And plant your joys in living Edward’s throne.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause To wail the dimming of our shining star, But none can help our harms by wailing them.— Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy; I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee I crave your blessing.
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
[standing] Amen. [aside] And make me die a good old man! That is the butt end of a mother’s blessing;I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers That bear this heavy mutual load of moan, Now cheer each other in each other’s love. Though we have spent our harvest of this king, We are to reap the harvest of his son. The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates, But lately splintered, knit, and joined together, Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept. Meseemeth good that with some little train Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
Why “with some little train,” my Lord of Buckingham?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude The new-healed wound of malice should break out, Which would be so much the more dangerous By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned. Where every horse bears his commanding rein And may direct his course as please himself, As well the fear of harm as harm apparent, In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
I hope the king made peace with all of us;And the compact is firm and true in me.
And so in me, and so, I think, in all. Yet since it is but green, it should be put To no apparent likelihood of breach, Which haply by much company might be urged. Therefore I say with noble Buckingham That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
And so say I.
Then be it so, and go we to determine Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.— Madam, and you, my sister, will you go To give your censures in this business?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, whoever journeys to the prince, For God’s sake let not us two at home. For by the way I’ll sort occasion, As index to the story we late talked of, To part the queen’s proud kindred from the prince.
My other self, my council’s consistory, My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin, I, as a child, will go by thy direction Toward Ludlow then, for we’ll not stay behind.
Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
I promise you I scarcely know myself.Hear you the news abroad?
Yes, that the king is dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ill news, by 'r Lady. Seldom comes the better. I fear, I fear, ’twill prove a giddy world.
Neighbors, God speed.
Give you good morrow, sir.
Doth this news hold of good King Edward’s death?
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
No, no, by God’s good grace, his son shall reign.
Woe to the land that’s governed by a child.
In him there is a hope of government, Which, in his nonage, council under him, And, in his full and ripened years, himself, No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
So stood the state when Henry the SixthWas crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot, For then this land was famously enriched With politic grave counsel; then the king Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
Better it were they all came by his father, Or by the father there were none at all, For emulation who shall now be nearest Will touch us all too near if God prevent not. O, full of danger is the duke of Gloucester, And the queen’s sons and brothers haught and proud, And were they to be ruled, and not to rule, This sickly land might solace as before.
Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks; When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand; When the sun sets, who doth not look for night? Untimely storms make men expect a dearth. All may be well; but if God sort it so, 'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of dread.
Before the days of change, still is it so. By a divine instinct, men’s minds mistrust Ensuing dangers, as by proof we see The water swell before a boist'rous storm. But leave it all to God. Whither away?
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
And so was I. I’ll bear you company.
Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,And at Northampton they do rest tonight.Tomorrow or next day they will be here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I long with all my heart to see the prince. I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
But I hear no; they say my son of YorkHas almost overta'en him in his growth.
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
Why, my young cousin? It is good to grow.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper, My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow More than my brother: “Ay,” quoth my uncle Gloucester, “Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.” And since, methinks I would not grow so fast Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold In him that did object the same to thee! He was the wretched’st thing when he was young, So long a-growing and so leisurely, That if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered,I could have given my uncle’s grace a flout To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
How, my pretty York? I prithee let me hear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old. 'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth. Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
Grandam, his nurse.
His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
If ’twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
Pitchers have ears.
Here comes a messenger. —What news?
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How doth the prince?
Well, madam, and in health.
What is thy news then?
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
Who hath committed them?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
For what offence?
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed.Why, or for what, the nobles were committedIs all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house. The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind. Insulting tyranny begins to jut Upon the innocent and aweless throne. Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre. I see, as in a map, the end of all.
Accursèd and unquiet wrangling days, How many of you have mine eyes beheld? My husband lost his life to get the crown, And often up and down my sons were tossed For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss. And being seated, and domestic broils Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors Make war upon themselves, brother to brother, Blood to blood, self against self. O, preposterous And frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen, Or let me die, to look on death no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to YORK] Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.Madam, farewell.
Stay, I will go with you.
You have no cause.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] My gracious lady, go, And thither bear your treasure and your goods. For my part, I’ll resign unto your Grace The seal I keep; and so betide to me As well I tender you and all of yours. Go. I’ll conduct you to the sanctuary.
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to PRINCE] Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.The weary way hath made you melancholy.
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years Hath not yet dived into the world’s deceit; Nor more can you distinguish of a man Than of his outward show, which, God He knows, Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. Those uncles which you want were dangerous. Your Grace attended to their sugared words But looked not on the poison of their hearts. God keep you from them, and from such false friends.
God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.— I thought my mother and my brother York Would long ere this have met us on the way. Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not To tell us whether they will come or no!
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
On what occasion God He knows, not I, The Queen your mother and your brother York Have taken sanctuary. The tender prince Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace, But by his mother was perforce withheld.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, what an indirect and peevish course Is this of hers! —Lord Cardinal, will your Grace Persuade the queen to send the duke of York Unto his princely brother presently?— If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him, And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory Can from his mother win the duke of York, Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid We should infringe the holy privilege Of blessèd sanctuary! Not for all this land Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
You are too senseless obstinate, my lord, Too ceremonious and traditional. Weigh it but with the grossness of this age, You break not sanctuary in seizing him. The benefit thereof is always granted To those whose dealings have deserved the place And those who have the wit to claim the place. This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it. Then taking him from thence that is not there, You break no privilege nor charter there. Oft have I heard of sanctuary men, But sanctuary children, ne'er till now.
My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.—Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
I go, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
Where it seems best unto your royal self. If I may counsel you, some day or two Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower; Then where you please and shall be thought most fit For your best health and recreation.
I do not like the Tower, of any place.—Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it upon record, or else reportedSuccessively from age to age, he built it?
Upon record, my gracious lord.
But say, my lord, it were not registered, Methinks the truth should live from age to age, As ’twere retailed to all posterity, Even to the general all-ending day.
[aside] So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
What say you, uncle?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I say, without characters fame lives long. [aside] Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,I moralize two meanings in one word.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man. With what his valor did enrich his wit, His wit set down to make his valor live. Death makes no conquest of this conqueror, For now he lives in fame, though not in life. I’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham—
What, my gracious lord?
An if I live until I be a man,I’ll win our ancient right in France againOr die a soldier, as I lived a king.
[aside] Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now in good time here comes the duke of York.
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
Well, my dread lord—so must I call you now.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.Too late he died that might have kept that title, Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.
And therefore is he idle?
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
Then is he more beholding to you than I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He may command me as my sovereign,But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.
A beggar, brother?
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A greater gift than that I’ll give my cousin.
A greater gift? O, that’s the sword to it.
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
O, then I see you will part but with light gifts.In weightier things you’ll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
How?
Little.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord of York will still be cross in talk.Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.— Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me. Because that I am little, like an ape, He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
[aside] With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, He prettily and aptly taunts himself. So cunning and so young is wonderful.
[to PRINCE] My lord, will ’t please you pass along? Myself and my good cousin Buckingham Will to your mother, to entreat of her To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
[to PRINCE] What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord protector needs will have it so.
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Why, what should you fear?
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost. My grandam told me he was murdered there.
I fear no uncles dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor none that live, I hope.
An if they live, I hope I need not fear. [to YORK] But come, my lord. With a heavy heart,Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
Think you, my lord, this little prating YorkWas not incensèd by his subtle motherTo taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt. O, ’tis a parlous boy,Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. He is all the mother’s, from the top to toe.
Well, let them rest.— Come hither, Catesby. Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend As closely to conceal what we impart. Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way. What thinkest thou? Is it not an easy matter To make William Lord Hastings of our mind For the installment of this noble duke In the seat royal of this famous isle?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He, for his father’s sake, so loves the prince That he will not be won to aught against him.
What think’st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby, And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings How he doth stand affected to our purpose And summon him tomorrow to the Tower To sit about the coronation. If thou dost find him tractable to us, Encourage him and show him all our reasons. If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling, Be thou so too, and so break off the talk, And give us notice of his inclination; For we tomorrow hold divided councils, Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby, His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret castle, And bid my lord, for joy of this good news, Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
You shall, my lord.
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceiveLord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Chop off his head. Something we will determine. And look when I am king, claim thou of me The earldom of Hereford, and all the moveables Whereof the king my brother was possessed.
I’ll claim that promise at your Grace’s hands.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwardsWe may digest our complots in some form.
[knocking] My lord, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Who knocks?
One from the Lord Stanley.
[within] What is ‘t o’clock?
Upon the stroke of four.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So it appears by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble self.
What then?
Then certifies your Lordship that this night He dreamt the boar had razèd his helm. Besides, he says there are two councils kept, And that may be determined at the one Which may make you and him to rue at th' other. Therefore he sends to know your Lordship’s pleasure, If you will presently take horse with him And with all speed post with him toward the north To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord. Bid him not fear the separated council. His Honor and myself are at the one, And at the other is my good friend Catesby, Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us Whereof I shall not have intelligence. Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance. And for his dreams, I wonder he’s so simple To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers. To fly the boar before the boar pursues Were to incense the boar to follow us And make pursuit where he did mean no chase. Go, bid thy master rise and come to me, And we will both together to the Tower, Where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
I’ll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Many good morrows to my noble lord.
Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring.What news, what news in this our tott'ring state?
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,And I believe will never stand uprightTill Richard wear the garland of the realm.
How “wear the garland?” Dost thou mean the crown?
Ay, my good lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll have this crown of mine cut from my shouldersBefore I’ll see the crown so foul misplaced.But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward Upon his party for the gain thereof; And thereupon he sends you this good news, That this same very day your enemies, The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news, Because they have been still my adversaries. But that I’ll give my voice on Richard’s side To bar my master’s heirs in true descent, God knows I will not do it, to the death.
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, That they which brought me in my master’s hate, I live to look upon their tragedy. Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older I’ll send some packing that yet think not on ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so ’twill do With some men else that think themselves as safe As thou and I, who, as thou know’st, are dear To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
The princes both make high account of you— [aside] For they account his head upon the Bridge.
I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man? Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, good morrow. —Good morrow, Catesby.—You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,I do not like these several councils, I.
My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours, And never in my days, I do protest, Was it so precious to me as ’tis now. Think you but that I know our state secure, I would be so triumphant as I am?
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London, Were jocund and supposed their states were sure, And they indeed had no cause to mistrust; But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast. This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt. Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward! What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their headsThan some that have accused them wear their hats. But come, my lord, let’s away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go on before. I’ll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah! How goes the world with thee?
The better that your Lordship please to ask.
I tell thee, man, ’tis better with me now Than when thou met’st me last where now we meet. Then was I going prisoner to the Tower By the suggestion of the queen’s allies. But now, I tell thee—keep it to thyself— This day those enemies are put to death, And I in better state than e'er I was.
God hold it, to your Honor’s good content!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
I thank your Honor.
Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.I am in your debt for your last exercise.Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.
I’ll wait upon your Lordship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest; Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,The men you talk of came into my mind.What, go you toward the Tower?
I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay there. I shall return before your Lordship thence.
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
[aside] And supper too, although thou know’st it not.—Come, will you go?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll wait upon your Lordship.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this:Today shalt thou behold a subject dieFor truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
[to RATCLIFFE] God bless the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.
[to RATCLIFFE] You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,Fatal and ominous to noble peers! Within the guilty closure of thy walls,Richard the Second here was hacked to death,And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margaret’s curse is fall'n upon our heads,When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I, For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham.Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,Which, as thou know’st, unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.
Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let us all embrace. [They embrace] Farewell until we meet in heaven.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, noble peers. the cause why we are metIs to determine of the coronation.In God’s name, speak. When is the royal day?
Is all things ready for the royal time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
Who knows the Lord Protector’s mind herein?Who is most inward with the noble duke?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
We know each other’s faces; for our hearts, He knows no more of mine than I of yours, Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.— Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
I thank his Grace. I know he loves me well. But for his purpose in the coronation, I have not sounded him, nor he delivered His gracious pleasure any way therein. But you, my honorable lords, may name the time, And in the duke’s behalf I’ll give my voice, Which I presume he’ll take in gentle part.
In happy time here comes the duke himself.
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. I have been long a sleeper; but I trust My absence doth neglect no great design Which by my presence might have been concluded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part—I mean your voice for crowning of the king.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder. His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.— My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn I saw good strawberries in your garden there; I do beseech you, send for some of them.
Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you. [they move aside] Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business And finds the testy gentleman so hot As he will lose his head ere give consent His master’s child, as worshipfully he terms it, Shall lose the royalty of England’s throne.
Withdraw yourself awhile. I’ll go with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have not yet set down this day of triumph. Tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden, For I myself am not so well provided As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Where is my lord the duke of Gloucester?I have sent for these strawberries.
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning. There’s some conceit or other likes him well When that he bids good morrow with such spirit. I think there’s never a man in Christendom Can lesser hide his love or hate than he, For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceive you in his face By any livelihood he showed today?
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray God he be not, I say.
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve That do conspire my death with devilish plots Of damnèd witchcraft, and that have prevailed Upon my body with their hellish charms?
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord, Makes me most forward in this princely presence To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be. I say, my lord, they have deservèd death.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil. [shows his arm] Look how I am bewitched! Behold mine arm Is like a blasted sapling withered up; And this is Edward’s wife, that monstrous witch, Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore, That by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If? Thou protector of this damnèd strumpet, Talk’st thou to me of “ifs?” Thou art a traitor— Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear I will not dine until I see the same.— Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.— The rest that love me, rise and follow me.
Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me, For I, too fond, might have prevented this. Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm, And I did scorn it and disdain to fly. Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble, And started when he looked upon the Tower, As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse. O, now I need the priest that spake to me! I now repent I told the pursuivant, As too triumphing, how mine enemies Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered, And I myself secure in grace and favor. O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head.
Come, come, dispatch. The duke would be at dinner. Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.
O momentary grace of mortal men, Which we more hunt for than the grace of God! Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, Ready with every nod to tumble down Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Come, come, dispatch. 'Tis bootless to exclaim.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O bloody Richard! Miserable England, I prophesy the fearfull’st time to thee That ever wretched age hath looked upon.— Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head. They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color, Murder thy breath in the middle of a word, And then begin again, and stop again, As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian, Speak, and look back, and pry on every side, Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks Are at my service, like enforcèd smiles, And both are ready in their offices, At any time to grace my stratagems. But what, is Catesby gone?
He is; and see, he brings the mayor along.
Lord Mayor—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look to the drawbridge there!
Hark, a drum!
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent—
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God and our innocence defend and guard us!
Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the man that I must weep. I took him for the plainest harmless creature That breathed upon this earth a Christian; Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded The history of all her secret thoughts. So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue That, his apparent open guilt omitted— I mean his conversation with Shore’s wife— He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Well, well, he was the covert’st sheltered traitor Thatever lived. [to the MAYOR] Would you imagine, or almost believe, Were ’t not that by great preservation We live to tell it, that subtle traitor This day had plotted, in the council house To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had he done so?
What, think you we are Turks or infidels? Or that we would, against the form of law, Proceed thus rashly in the villain’s death, But that the extreme peril of the case, The peace of England and our persons' safety Enforced us to this execution?
Now fair befall you! He deserved his death, And your good Graces both have well proceeded To warn false traitors from the like attempts. I never looked for better at his handsAfter he once fell in with Mrs Shore.
Yet had we not determined he should die Until your Lordship came to see his end (Which now the loving haste of these our friends, Something against our meaning, have prevented), Because, my lord, I would have had you heard The traitor speak, and timorously confess The manner and the purpose of his treasons, That you might well have signified the same Unto the citizens, who haply may Misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.
But, my good lord, your Graces' words shall serve As well as I had seen and heard him speak; And do not doubt, right noble princes both, But I’ll acquaint our duteous citizens With all your just proceedings in this case.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And to that end we wished your Lordship hereT' avoid the censures of the carping world.
Which since you come too late of our intent,Yet witness what you hear we did intend.And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham. The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post. There, at your meetest vantage of the time, Infer the bastardy of Edward’s children. Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen Only for saying he would make his son Heir to the Crown—meaning indeed his house, Which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so. Moreover, urge his hateful luxury And bestial appetite in change of lust, Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, Even where his raging eye or savage heart, Without control, lusted to make his prey. Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person: Tell them when that my mother went with child Of that insatiate Edward, noble York My princely father then had wars in France, And, by true computation of the time, Found that the issue was not his begot, Which well appearèd in his lineaments, Being nothing like the noble duke my father. Yet touch this sparingly, as ’twere far off, Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
Doubt not, my lord. I’ll play the oratorAs if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard’s Castle,Where you shall find me well accompaniedWith reverend fathers and well-learnèd bishops.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I go; and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaw. [to RATCLIFFE] Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them bothMeet me within this hour at Baynard’s Castle.
Now will I go to take some privy order To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight, And to give order that no manner of person Have any time recourse unto the princes.
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed, That it may be today read o'er in Paul’s. And mark how well the sequel hangs together: Eleven hours I have spent to write it over, For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me; The precedent was full as long a-doing, And yet within these five hours Hastings lived, Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty. Here’s a good world the while. Who is so gross That cannot see this palpable device? Yet who so bold but says he sees it not? Bad is the world, and all will come to naughtWhen such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
How now, how now? What say the citizens?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Touched you the bastardy of Edward’s children?
I did, with his contract with Lady Lucy And his contract by deputy in France; Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire And his enforcement of the city wives; His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, As being got, your father then in France, His resemblance being not like the duke. Withal, I did infer your lineaments, Being the right idea of your father, Both in your form and nobleness of mind; Laid open all your victories in Scotland, Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, Your bounty, virtue, fair humility; Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose Untouched or slightly handled in discourse. And when mine oratory grew toward end, I bid them that did love their country’s good Cry “God save Richard, England’s royal king!”
And did they so?
No. So God help me, they spake not a word But, like dumb statues or breathing stones, Stared each on other and looked deadly pale; Which when I saw, I reprehended them And asked the mayor what meant this willful silence. His answer was, the people were not used To be spoke to but by the recorder. Then he was urged to tell my tale again: “Thus saith the duke. Thus hath the duke inferred”— But nothing spoke in warrant from himself. When he had done, some followers of mine own, At the lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps, And some ten voices cried “God save King Richard!” And thus I took the vantage of those few. “Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,” quoth I. "This general applause and cheerful shout Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard"— And even here brake off, and came away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What tongueless blocks were they! Would not they speak?Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear; Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit. And look you get a prayer book in your hand And stand between two churchmen, good my lord, For on that ground I’ll make a holy descant . And be not easily won to our requests. Play the maid’s part: still answer “nay,” and take it.
I go. An if you plead as well for themAs I can say “nay” to thee for myself,No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.
Welcome, my lord. I dance attendance here.I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord, To visit him tomorrow or next day. He is within, with two right reverend fathers, Divinely bent to meditation, And in no worldly suits would he be moved To draw him from his holy exercise.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke. Tell him myself, the mayor, and aldermen, No less importing than our general good, In deep designs, and matters of great moment Are come to have some conference with his grace.
I’ll signify so much unto him straight.
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward! He is not lolling on a lewd love bed, But on his knees at meditation; Not dallying with a brace of courtesans, But meditating with two deep divines; Not sleeping, to engross his idle body, But praying, to enrich his watchful soul. Happy were England would this virtuous prince Take on his grave the sovereignty thereof. But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, God defend his grace should say us nay!
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.
Now, Catesby, what says his grace?
He wonders to what end you have assembled Such troops of citizens to come to him, His grace not being warned thereof before. He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should Suspect me that I mean no good to him. By heaven, we come to him in perfect love, And so once more return and tell his grace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When holy and devout religious menAre at their beads, ’tis much to draw them thence,So sweet is zealous contemplation.
See where his Grace stands, ’tween two clergymen.
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, To stay him from the fall of vanity; And, see, a book of prayer in his hand, True ornaments to know a holy man.— Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince, Lend favorable ears to our requests, And pardon us the interruption Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs no such apology. I do beseech your Grace pardon me, Who, earnest in the service of my God, Deferred the visitation of my friends. But, leaving this, what is your Grace’s pleasure?
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do suspect I have done some offenseThat seems disgracious in the city’s eye,And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace, On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Know, then, it is your fault that you resign The supreme seat, the throne majestical, The sceptered office of your ancestors, Your state of fortune, and your due of birth, The lineal glory of your royal house, To the corruption of a blemished stock, Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, Which here we waken to our country’s good, The noble isle doth want her proper limbs— Her face defaced with scars of infamy, Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion; Which to recure, we heartily solicit Your gracious self to take on you the charge And kingly government of this your land, Not as Protector, steward, substitute, Or lowly factor for another’s gain, But as successively, from blood to blood, Your right of birth, your empery, your own. For this, consorted with the citizens, Your very worshipful and loving friends, And by their vehement instigation, In this just suit come I to move your Grace.
I cannot tell if to depart in silence Or bitterly to speak in your reproof Best fitteth my degree or your condition. If not to answer, you might haply think Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty, Which fondly you would here impose on me. If to reprove you for this suit of yours, So seasoned with your faithful love to me, Then on the other side I checked my friends. Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, And then, in speaking, not to incur the last, Definitively thus I answer you: Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert Unmeritable shuns your high request. First, if all obstacles were cut away And that my path were even to the crown As the ripe revenue and due of birth, Yet so much is my poverty of spirit, So mighty and so many my defects, That I would rather hide me from my greatness, Being a bark to brook no mighty sea, Than in my greatness covet to be hid And in the vapor of my glory smothered. But, God be thanked, there is no need of me, And much I need to help you, were there need. The royal tree hath left us royal fruit, Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time, Will well become the seat of majesty, And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. On him I lay what you would lay on me, The right and fortune of his happy stars, Which God defend that I should wring from him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace, But the respects thereof are nice and trivial, All circumstances well considerèd. You say that Edward is your brother’s son; So say we too, but not by Edward’s wife. For first was he contract to Lady Lucy— Your mother lives a witness to that vow— And afterward by substitute betrothed To Bona, sister to the king of France. These both put off, a poor petitioner, A care-crazed mother to a many sons, A beauty-waning and distressèd widow, Even in the afternoon of her best days, Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye, Seduced the pitch and height of his degree To base declension and loathed bigamy. By her in his unlawful bed he got This Edward, whom our manners term “the Prince.” More bitterly could I expostulate, Save that, for reverence to some alive, I give a sparing limit to my tongue. Then, good my lord, take to your royal self This proffered benefit of dignity, If not to bless us and the land withal, Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry From the corruption of abusing times Unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.
Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
O, make them joyful. Grant their lawful suit.
Alas, why would you heap this care on me? I am unfit for state and majesty. I do beseech you, take it not amiss; I cannot, nor I will not, yield to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you refuse it, as in love and zeal Loath to depose the child, your brother’s son— As well we know your tenderness of heart And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, Which we have noted in you to your kindred And equally indeed to all estates— Yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no, Your brother’s son shall never reign our king, But we will plant some other in the throne, To the disgrace and downfall of your house. And in this resolution here we leave you.— Come, citizens. Zounds, I’ll entreat no more.
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!
Call them again, sweet prince. Accept their suit.If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
Will you enforce me to a world of cares? Call them again. I am not made of stones, But penetrable to your kind entreaties, Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men, Since you will buckle fortune on my back, To bear her burden, whe'er I will or no, I must have patience to endure the load; But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach Attend the sequel of your imposition, Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me From all the impure blots and stains thereof, For God doth know, and you may partly see, How far I am from the desire of this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Then I salute you with this royal title: Long live Richard, England’s worthy king!
Amen.
Tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even when you please, since you will have it so.
Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace, And so most joyfully we take our leave.
[to the bishops] Come, let us to our holy task again.—Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.
Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester? Now, for my life, she’s wandering to the Tower, On pure heart’s love, to greet the tender prince.— Daughter, well met.
God give your Graces bothA happy and a joyful time of day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,Upon the like devotion as yourselves, To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Kind sister, thanks. We’ll enter all together.
And in good time here the lieutenant comes.—Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,How doth the prince and my young son of York?
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,I may not suffer you to visit them.The king hath strictly charged the contrary.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king? Who’s that?
I mean, the Lord Protector.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title! Hath he set bounds between their love and me?I am their mother. Who shall bar me from them?
I am their father’s mother. I will see them.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.Then bring me to their sights. I’ll bear thy blame And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, madam, no. I may not leave it so.I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence, And I’ll salute your Grace of York as mother And reverend looker-on, of two fair queens. [to ANNE] Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster, There to be crownèd Richard’s royal queen.
Ah, cut my lace asunder that my pent heart May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon With this dead-killing news!
Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Dorset, speak not to me. Get thee gone. Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels. Thy mother’s name is ominous to children. If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas, And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell. Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse, Lest thou increase the number of the dead And make me die the thrall of Margaret’s curse, Nor mother, wife, nor England’s counted queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. [to DORSET] Take all the swift advantage of the hours.You shall have letters from me to my son In your behalf, to meet you on the way.Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!O my accursèd womb, the bed of death!A cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world, Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
[to ANNE] Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.
And I in all unwillingness will go. O, would to God that the inclusive verge Of golden metal that must round my brow Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains! Anointed let me be with deadly venom, And die ere men can say, “God save the Queen.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.To feed my humor, wish thyself no harm.
No? Why? When he that is my husband now Came to me, as I followed Henry’s corse, When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands Which issued from my other angel husband And that dear saint which then I weeping followed— O, when, I say, I looked on Richard’s face, This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed For making me, so young, so old a widow; And, when thou wedd’st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; And be thy wife, if any be so mad, More miserable by the life of thee Than thou hast made me by my dear lord’s death. Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again, Within so small a time my woman’s heart Grossly grew captive to his honey words And proved the subject of mine own soul’s curse, Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest, For never yet one hour in his bed Did I enjoyed the golden dew of sleep, But with his timorous dreams was still awaked. Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick, And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Adieu, poor soul that tak’st thy leave of it.
[to DORSET] Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee. [to ANNE] Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee. [to QUEEN ELIZABETH] Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee. I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me. Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen, And each hour’s joy wracked with a week of teen.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.— Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes Whom envy hath immured within your walls— Rough cradle for such little pretty ones. Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow For tender princes, use my babies well. So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
Stand all apart. —Cousin of Buckingham.
My gracious sovereign.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice And thy assistance is King Richard seated. But shall we wear these glories for a day, Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
Still live they, and forever let them last.
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, To try if thou be current gold indeed.Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
Say on, my loving lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king,
Why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.
Ha! Am I king? 'Tis so—but Edward lives.
True, noble prince.
O bitter consequence That Edward still should live “true noble prince!” Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull. Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead, And I would have it suddenly performed. What sayest thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your Grace may do your pleasure.
Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,Before I positively speak in this.I will resolve you herein presently.
[aside to the other attendants] The king is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.
[aside] I will converse with iron-witted fools And unrespective boys. None are for me That look into me with considerate eyes. High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.— Boy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][coming forward] My lord?
Know’st thou not any whom corrupting goldWill tempt unto a close exploit of death?
I know a discontented gentleman Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit. Gold were as good as twenty orators, And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
What is his name?
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy
[aside] The deep-revolving witty Buckingham No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels Hath he so long held out with me, untired, And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley, what’s the news?
Know, my loving lord,The marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad That Anne my wife is very grievous sick. I will take order for her keeping close. Enquire me out some mean poor gentleman, Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter. The boy is foolish, and I fear not him. Look how thou dream’st! I say again, give out That Anne my queen is sick and like to die. About it, for it stands me much upon To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] I must be married to my brother’s daughter, Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. Murder her brothers, and then marry her— Uncertain way of gain. But I am in So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin. Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Art thou indeed?
Prove me, my gracious lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dar’st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies, Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep’s disturbers, Are they that I would have thee deal upon. Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means to come to them,And soon I’ll rid you from the fear of them.
Thou sing’st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.
There is no more but so. Say it is done,And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
I will dispatch it straight.
My lord, I have considered in my mind The late request that you did sound me in.
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hear the news, my lord.
Stanley, he is your wife’s son. Well, look unto it.
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise, For which your honor and your faith is pawned— Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables Which you promisèd I shall possess.
Stanley, look to your wife. If she conveyLetters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
What says your Highness to my just request?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do remember me, Henry the Sixth Did prophesy that Richmond should be king, When Richmond was a little peevish boy. A king, perhaps—
My lord—
How chance the prophet could not at that timeHave told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
My lord, your promise for the earldom—
Richmond? When last I was at Exeter, The mayor in courtesy showed me the castle And called it Rougemont, at which name I started, Because a bard of Ireland told me once I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord—
Ay, what’s o'clock?
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mindOf what you promised me.
Well, but what’s o'clock?
Upon the stroke of ten.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, let it strike.
Why let it strike?
Because that, like a jack, thou keep’st the strokeBetwixt thy begging and my meditation.I am not in the giving vein today.
Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And is it thus? Repays he my deep service With such deep contempt? Made I him king for this? O, let me think on Hastings and be gone To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
The tyrannous and bloody act is done, The most arch deed of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn To do this piece of ruthless butchery, Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs, Melted with tenderness and mild compassion, Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. “O thus” quoth Dighton, “lay those gentle babes.” “Thus, thus,” quoth Forrest, “girdling one another Within their alabaster innocent arms. Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, And in their summer beauty kissed each other. A book of prayers on their pillow lay, Which once,” quoth Forrest, “almost changed my mind, But O, the devil—”There the villain stopped; When Dighton thus told on: “We smotherèd The most replenishèd sweet work of nature That from the prime creation e'er she framed.” Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse; They could not speak; and so I left them both To bear this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.—All health, my sovereign lord.
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
If to have done the thing you gave in chargeBeget your happiness, be happy then,For it is done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But did’st thou see them dead?
I did, my lord.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them, But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper, When thou shalt tell the process of their death. Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, And be inheritor of thy desire. Farewell till then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly take my leave.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close, His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage, The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham’s bosom, And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight. Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims At young Elizabeth, my brother’s daughter, And by that knot looks proudly on the crown, To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
My lord!
Good or bad news, that thou com’st in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ely with Richmond troubles me more near Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength. Come, I have learned that fearful commenting Is leaden servitor to dull delay; Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary; Then fiery expedition be my wing, Jove’s Mercury, and herald for a king. Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield. We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
So now prosperity begins to mellow And drop into the rotten mouth of death. Here in these confines slyly have I lurked To watch the waning of mine enemies. A dire induction am I witness to, And will to France, hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes, My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets, If yet your gentle souls fly in the air And be not fixed in doom perpetual, Hover about me with your airy wings And hear your mother’s lamentation.
[aside] Hover about her; say that right for rightHath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.
So many miseries have crazed my voiceThat my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambsAnd throw them in the entrails of the wolf?When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
[aside] When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
[sitting down] Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost, Woe’s scene, world’s shame, grave’s due by life usurped, Brief abstract and record of tedious days, Rest thy unrest on England’s lawful earth, Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
[sitting down beside her] Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave As thou canst yield a melancholy seat, Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here. O, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][joining them] If ancient sorrow be most reverend, Give mine the benefit of seigniory, And let my griefs frown on the upper hand. If sorrow can admit society, Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. I had an Edward till a Richard killed him; I had a husband till a Richard killed him. Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him; Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.
I had a Richard too, and thou did’st kill him; I had a Rutland too; thou holp’st to kill him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him Then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept A hellhound that doth hunt us all to death— That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood; That excellent grand tyrant of the earth, That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls; That foul defacer of God’s handiwork Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. O upright, just, and true-disposing God, How do I thank thee that this carnal cur Preys on the issue of his mother’s body And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
O Harry’s wife, triumph not in my woes! God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge, And now I cloy me with beholding it. Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward, Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward; Young York, he is but boot, because both they Matched not the high perfection of my loss. Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward, And the beholders of this frantic play, Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey, Untimely smothered in their dusky graves. Richard yet lives, hell’s black intelligencer, Only reserved their factor to buy souls And send them thither. But at hand, at hand Ensues his piteous and unpitied end. Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray, To have him suddenly conveyed from hence. Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray, That I may live to say, “The dog is dead.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curseThat bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
I called thee then “vain flourish of my fortune.” I called thee then poor shadow, “painted queen,” The presentation of but what I was, The flattering index of a direful pageant, One heaved a-high, to be hurled down below, A mother only mocked with two fair babes, A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag To be the aim of every dangerous shot, A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble, A queen in jest, only to fill the scene. Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers? Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy? Who sues and kneels and says “God save the queen?” Where be the bending peers that flattered thee? Where be the thronging troops that followed thee? Decline all this, and see what now thou art: For happy wife, a most distressèd widow; For joyful mother, one that wails the name; For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care; For one being sued to, one that humbly sues; For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me; For she being feared of all, now fearing one; For she commanding all, obeyed of none. Thus hath the course of justice whirled about And left thee but a very prey to time, Having no more but thought of what thou wast To torture thee the more, being what thou art. Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow? Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke, From which even here I slip my weary head And leave the burthen of it all on thee. Farewell, York’s wife, and queen of sad mischance. These English woes will make me smile in France.
O, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile,And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days; Compare dead happiness with living woe; Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were, And he that slew them fouler than he is. Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.
Why should calamity be full of words?
Windy attorneys to their clients' woes, Airy succeeders of intestate joys, Poor breathing orators of miseries, Let them have scope, though what they will impart Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,And in the breath of bitter words let’s smotherMy damnèd son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who intercepts my expedition?
O, she that might have intercepted thee,By strangling thee in her accursèd womb,From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.
Hid’st thou that forehead with a golden crown Where should be branded, if that right were right, The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers? Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?And little Ned Plantagenet his son?
Where is gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is kind Hastings?
A flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums! Let not the heavens hear these telltale womenRail on the Lord’s anointed. Strike, I say!
Either be patient and entreat me fair,Or with the clamorous report of warThus will I drown your exclamations.
Art thou my son?
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then patiently hear my impatience.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
O, let me speak!
Do then, but I’ll not hear.
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,God knows, in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
No, by the Holy Rood, thou know’st it well. Thou cam’st on earth to make the earth my hell. A grievous burden was thy birth to me; Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy; Thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious; Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous; Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody, More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred. What comfortable hour canst thou name, That ever graced me in thy company?
Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your Grace To breakfast once, forth of my company. If I be so disgracious in your eye, Let me march on and not offend you, madam.— Strike up the drum.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee, hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.
Hear me a word,For I shall never speak to thee again.
So.
Either thou wilt die by God’s just ordinance Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish And nevermore behold thy face again. Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse, Which in the day of battle tire thee more Than all the complete armor that thou wear’st. My prayers on the adverse party fight, And there the little souls of Edward’s children Whisper the spirits of thine enemies And promise them success and victory. Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end. Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curseAbides in me. I say amen to her.
Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.
I have no more sons of the royal blood For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard, They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens, And therefore level not to hit their lives.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth, Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
And must she die for this? O, let her live, And I’ll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty, Slander myself as false to Edward’s bed, Throw over her the veil of infamy. So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter, I will confess she was not Edward’s daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.
To save her life, I’ll say she is not so.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny. My babes were destined to a fairer deathIf grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life. Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts, Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction. No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, To revel in the entrails of my lambs. But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes, And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death, Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft, Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise And dangerous success of bloody wars As I intend more good to you and yours Than ever you or yours were by me harmed!
What good is covered with the face of heaven,To be discovered, that can do me good?
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
Unto the dignity and height of fortune, The high imperial type of this earth’s glory.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Flatter my sorrow with report of it.Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor,Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Even all I have— ay, and myself and all— Will I withal endow a child of thine; So in the Lethe of thy angry soul Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
My daughter’s mother thinks it with her soul.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What do you think?
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul. So from thy soul’s love didst thou love her brothers,And from my heart’s love I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.I mean that with my soul I love thy daughterAnd do intend to make her Queen of England.
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, thou?
Even so. How think you of it?
How canst thou woo her?
That would I learn of you,As one being best acquainted with her humor.
And wilt thou learn of me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave “Edward” and “York.” Then haply she will weep. Therefore present to her—as sometime Margaret Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland’s blood— A handkerchief, which say to her did drain The purple sap from her sweet brother’s body, And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. If this inducement move her not to love, Send her a letter of thy noble deeds; Tell her thou mad’st away her uncle Clarence, Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake Mad’st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
You mock me, madam. This is not the wayTo win your daughter.
There is no other way,Unless thou couldst put on some other shape And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
Look what is done cannot be now amended. Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes, Which after-hours give leisure to repent. If I did take the kingdom from your sons, To make amends I’ll give it to your daughter. If I have killed the issue of your womb, To quicken your increase I will beget Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter. A grandam’s name is little less in love Than is the doting title of a mother. They are as children but one step below, Even of your metal, of your very blood, Of all one pain, save for a night of groans Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow. Your children were vexation to your youth, But mine shall be a comfort to your age. The loss you have is but a son being king, And by that loss your daughter is made queen. I cannot make you what amends I would; Therefore accept such kindness as I can. Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul Leads discontented steps in foreign soil, This fair alliance quickly shall call home To high promotions and great dignity. The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother. Again shall you be mother to a king, And all the ruins of distressful times Repaired with double riches of content. What, we have many goodly days to see! The liquid drops of tears that you have shed Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl, Advantaging their love with interest Of ten times double gain of happiness. Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go. Make bold her bashful years with your experience; Prepare her ears to hear a wooer’s tale; Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys; And when this arm of mine hath chastisèd The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham, Bound with triumphant garlands will I come And lead thy daughter to a conqueror’s bed, To whom I will retail my conquest won, And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar’s Caesar.
What were I best to say? Her father’s brother Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle? Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles? Under what title shall I woo for thee, That God, the law, my honor and her love Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Infer fair England’s peace by this alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell her the king, that may command, entreats—
That, at her hands, which the king’s King forbids.
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
Say I will love her everlastingly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But how long shall that title “ever” last?
Sweetly in force unto her fair life’s end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead—Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown—
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
I swear—
By nothing, for this is no oath. Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor; Thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue; Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory. If something thou wouldst swear to be believed, Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.
Then, by myself—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thyself is self-misused.
Now, by the world—
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
My father’s death—
Thy life hath it dishonored.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, by God.
God’s wrong is most of all. If thou didst fear to break an oath by Him, The unity the king my husband made Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died. If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him, Th' imperial metal circling now thy head Had graced the tender temples of my child, And both the princes had been breathing here, Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust, Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms. What canst thou swear by now?
The time to come.
That thou hast wrongèd in the time o'erpast; For I myself have many tears to wash Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee. The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered, Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age; The parents live whose children thou hast butchered, Old barren plants, to wail it with their age. Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast Misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.
As I intend to prosper and repent, So thrive I in my dangerous affairs Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound, Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours, Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest, Be opposite all planets of good luck To my proceedings if, with dear heart’s love, Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. In her consists my happiness and thine. Without her follows to myself and thee, Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul, Death, desolation, ruin and decay. It cannot be avoided but by this; It will not be avoided but by this. Therefore, dear mother—I must call you so— Be the attorney of my love to her: Plead what I will be, not what I have been; Not my deserts, but what I will deserve. Urge the necessity and state of times, And be not peevish found in great designs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
Ay, if your self’s remembrance wrong yourself.
Yet thou didst kill my children.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But in your daughter’s womb I bury them,Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breedSelves of themselves, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy mother by the deed.
I go. Write to me very shortly,And you shall understand from me her mind.
Bear her my true love’s kiss; and so, farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
How now, what news?
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends, Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back. 'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral; And there they hull, expecting but the aid Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend post to the duke of Norfolk—Ratcliffe, thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?
Here, my good lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Catesby, fly to the duke.
I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury. When thou com’st thither — [to CATESBY] Dull, unmindful villain, Why stay’st thou here and go’st not to the duke?
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
O true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straightThe greatest strength and power that he can make And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I go.
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
Your Highness told me I should post before.
My mind is changed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stanley, what news with you?
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad. What need’st thou run so many mile about When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way? Once more, what news?
Richmond is on the seas.
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!White-livered runagate, what doth he there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
Well, as you guess?
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed? Is the king dead, the empire unpossessed? What heir of York is there alive but we? And who is England’s king but great York’s heir? Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unless for that he comes to be your liege, You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back? Where be thy tenants and thy followers? Are they not now upon the western shore, Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
Cold friends to me. What do they in the northWhen they should serve their sovereign in the west?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They have not been commanded, mighty king. Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave, I’ll muster up my friends and meet your Grace Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond,But I’ll not trust thee.
Most mighty sovereign,You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.I never was nor never will be false.
Go then and muster men, but leave behindYour son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm. Or else his head’s assurance is but frail.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire, As I by friends am well advertisèd, Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate, Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother, With many more confederates are in arms.
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,And every hour more competitorsFlock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
My lord, the army of great Buckingham—
Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death. [he striketh him] There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
The news I have to tell your Majesty Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters Buckingham’s army is dispersed and scattered, And he himself wandered away alone, No man knows whither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cry thee mercy. There is my purse to cure that blow of thine. [he gives money] Hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset, 'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms. But this good comfort bring I to your Highness: The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest. Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat Unto the shore to ask those on the banks If they were his assistants, yea or no— Who answered him they came from Buckingham Upon his party. He, mistrusting them, Hoisted sail and made his course for Brittany.
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,If not to fight with foreign enemies,Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
My liege, the duke of Buckingham is taken. That is the best news. That the earl of Richmond Is with a mighty power landed at Milford, Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here, A royal battle might be won and lost. Someone take order Buckingham be brought To Salisbury. The rest march on with me.
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me: That in the sty of the most deadly boar My son George Stanley is franked up in hold; If I revolt, off goes young George’s head; The fear of that holds off my present aid. So get thee gone. Commend me to thy lord. Withal, say that the queen hath heartily consented He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter. But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.
What men of name resort to him?
Sir Walter Herbert, a renownèd soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley, Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt, And Rhys-ap-Thomas, with a valiant crew, And many other of great name and worth; And towards London they do bend their power, If by the way they be not fought withal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][gives him a paper] Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand. My letter will resolve him of my mind.Farewell.
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
Hastings and Edward’s children, Grey and Rivers, Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward, Vaughan, and all that have miscarrièd By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice, If that your moody, discontented souls Do through the clouds behold this present hour, Even for revenge mock my destruction.— This is All Souls' Day, fellow, is it not?
It is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then All Souls' Day is my body’s doomsday. This is the day which, in King Edward’s time, I wished might fall on me when I was found False to his children and his wife’s allies. This is the day wherein I wished to fall By the false faith of him who most I trusted. This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul Is the determined respite of my wrongs. That high All-seer which I dallied with Hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head And given in earnest what I begged in jest. Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. Thus Margaret’s curse falls heavy upon my neck: “When he,” quoth she, “shall split thy heart with sorrow, Remember Margaret was a prophetess.”— Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame. Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, Have we marched on without impediment, Thus far into the bowels of the land And here receive we from our father Stanley Lines of fair comfort and encouragement. The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines, Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough In your embowelled bosoms— this foul swine Is now even in the center of this isle, Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn. From Tamworth thither is but one day’s march. In God’s name, cheerly on, courageous friends, To reap the harvest of perpetual peace By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
Every man’s conscience is a thousand men,To fight against this guilty homicide.
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All for our vantage. Then, in God’s name, march.True hope is swift, and flies with swallow’s wings.Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.—My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk—
Here, most gracious liege.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Up with my tent!—Here will I lie tonight.But where tomorrow? Well, all’s one for that.Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why, our battalia trebles that account. Besides, the king’s name is a tower of strength Which they upon the adverse party want. Up with the tent!—Come, noble gentlemen, Let us survey the vantage of the ground. Call for some men of sound direction. Let’s lack no discipline, make no delay, For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The weary sun hath made a golden set, And by the bright track of his fiery car, Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.— Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.— Give me some ink and paper in my tent; I’ll draw the form and model of our battle, Limit each leader to his several charge, And part in just proportion our small power. My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon, And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me. The earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment— Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him, And by the second hour in the morning Desire the earl to see me in my tent. Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me. Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Unless I have mista'en his colors much, Which well I am assured I have not done, His regiment lies half a mile, at least, South from the mighty power of the king.
If without peril it be possible, Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him,And give him from me this most needful note.
Upon my life, my lord, I’ll undertake it.And so God give you quiet rest tonight!
Good night, good Captain Blunt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, gentlemen,Let us consult upon tomorrow’s businessInto my tent. The dew is raw and cold.
What is “t o”clock?
It’s suppertime, my lord. It’s nine o'clock.
I will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper.What, is my beaver easier than it was?And all my armor laid into my tent?
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge. Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.
I go, my lord.
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you, my lord.
Catesby.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord.
Send out a pursuivant-at-arms To Stanley’s regiment. Bid him bring his power Before sunrising, lest his son George fall Into the blind cave of eternal night.
[to soldiers] Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch. Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow. Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.— Ratcliffe.
My lord.
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thomas the earl of Surrey and himself,Much about cockshut time, from troop to troopWent through the army cheering up the soldiers.
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine. I have not that alacrity of spirit Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have. Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.
Bid my guard watch. Leave me. Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tentAnd help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All comfort that the dark night can affordBe to thy person, noble father-in-law. Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother, Who prays continually for Richmond’s good. So much for that. The silent hours steal on, And flaky darkness breaks within the east. In brief, for so the season bids us be, Prepare thy battle early in the morning, And put thy fortune to the arbitrament Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war. I, as I may—that which I would I cannot,— With best advantage will deceive the time, And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms. But on thy side I may not be too forward, Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George, Be executed in his father’s sight. Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love And ample interchange of sweet discourse, Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon. God give us leisure for these rites of love! Once more, adieu. Be valiant, and speed well.
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment: I’ll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap, Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow, When I should mount with wings of victory. Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain I account myself, Look on my forces with a gracious eye. Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, That they may crush down with a heavy fall The usurping helmets of our adversaries! Make us thy ministers of chastisement, That we may praise thee in the victory! To thee I do commend my watchful soul, Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes. Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still! [Sleeps]
[to RICHARD] Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow! Think how thou stabbed’st me in my prime of youth At Tewkesbury. Despair therefore, and die! [to RICHMOND] Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wrongèd souls Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf. King Henry’s issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to RICHARD] When I was mortal, my anointed body By thee was punchèd full of deadly holes. Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die! Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die. [to RICHMOND] Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror. Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king, Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.
[to RICHARD] Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, I, that was washed to death with fulsome wine, Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death. Tomorrow in the battle think on me, And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair, and die! [to RICHMOND] Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster, The wrongèd heirs of York do pray for thee Good angels guard thy battle. Live and flourish.
[to RICHARD] Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!
[to RICHARD] Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
[to RICHARD] Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fearLet fall thy lance. Despair, and die!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to RICHMOND] Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard’s bosomWill conquer him! Awake, and win the day.
[to RICHARD] Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower. Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard, And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death. Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die. [to RICHMOND] Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. Good angels guard thee from the boar’s annoy. Live, and beget a happy race of kings. Edward’s unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
[to RICHARD] Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake, And in a bloody battle end thy days. Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die! [to RICHMOND] Quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake. Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England’s sake.
[to RICHARD] Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife, That never slept a quiet hour with thee, Now fills thy sleep with perturbations. Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me, And fall thy edgeless sword: Despair and die! [to RICHMOND] Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep. Dream of success and happy victory. Thy adversary’s wife doth pray for thee.
[to RICHARD] The last was I that helped thee to the crown; The last was I that felt thy tyranny. O, in the battle think on Buckingham, And die in terror of thy guiltiness. Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death. Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath. [to RICHMOND] I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid, But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed. God and good angels fight on Richmond’s side, And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds! Have mercy, Jesu!—Soft, I did but dream. O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight. Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. What do I fear? Myself? There’s none else by. Richard loves Richard; that is, I and I. Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am. Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why: Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself? Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good That I myself have done unto myself? O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself For hateful deeds committed by myself. I am a villain. Yet I lie. I am not. Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter. My conscience hath a thousand several tongues, And every tongue brings in a several tale, And every tale condemns me for a villain. Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree; Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree; All several sins, all used in each degree, Throng to the bar, crying all, “Guilty! guilty!” I shall despair. There is no creature loves me, And if I die no soul will pity me. And wherefore should they, since that I myself Find in myself no pity to myself? Methought the souls of all that I had murdered Came to my tent, and every one did threat Tomorrow’s vengeance on the head of Richard.
My lord.
Zounds, who is there?
Ratcliffe, my lord, ’tis I. The early village cockHath twice done salutation to the morn.Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream! What think’st thou, will our friends prove all true?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No doubt, my lord.
O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond. 'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me; Under our tents I’ll play the eavesdropper To see if any mean to shrink from me.
Good morrow, Richmond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
How have you slept, my lord?
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams That ever entered in a drowsy head Have I since your departure had, my lords. Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered Came to my tent and cried on victory. I promise you, my soul is very jocund In the remembrance of so fair a dream. How far into the morning is it, lords?
Upon the stroke of four.
Why, then ’tis time to arm and give direction. [his oration to his soldiers] More than I have said, loving countrymen, The leisure and enforcement of the time Forbids to dwell upon. Yet remember this: God and our good cause fight upon our side. The prayers of holy saints and wrongèd souls, Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces. Richard except, those whom we fight against Had rather have us win than him they follow. For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen, A bloody tyrant and a homicide; One raised in blood, and one in blood established; One that made means to come by what he hath, And slaughtered those that were the means to help him; A base foul stone, made precious by the foil Of England’s chair, where he is falsely set; One that hath ever been God’s enemy. Then if you fight against God’s enemy, God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers. If you do sweat to put a tyrant down, You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain. If you do fight against your country’s foes, Your country’s fat shall pay your pains the hire. If you do fight in safeguard of your wives, Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. If you do free your children from the sword, Your children’s children quits it in your age. Then, in the name of God and all these rights, Advance your standards. Draw your willing swords. For me, the ransom of my bold attempt Shall be this cold corpse on the earth’s cold face; But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt The least of you shall share his part thereof. Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully; God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
That he was never trainèd up in arms.
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said “The better for our purpose.”
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar. [he looks in an almanac] Who saw the sun today?
Not I, my lord.
Then he disdains to shine, for by the bookHe should have braved the east an hour ago A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe!
My lord.
The sun will not be seen today. The sky doth frown and lour upon our army. I would these dewy tears were from the ground. Not shine today? Why, what is that to me More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.— Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.— I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, And thus my battle shall be orderèd: My foreward shall be drawn out all in length, Consisting equally of horse and foot; Our archers shall be placèd in the midst. John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey, Shall have the leading of this foot and horse. They thus directed, we will follow In the main battle, whose puissance on either side Shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse. This, and Saint George to boot—What think’st thou, Norfolk?
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
This found I on my tent this morning.
[reads] Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold. For Dickon thy master is bought and sold. A thing devisèd by the enemy.— Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge. Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls. Conscience is but a word that cowards use, Devised at first to keep the strong in awe. Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law. March on. Join bravely. Let us to it pell mell If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell. [his oration to his army] What shall I say more than I have inferred? Remember whom you are to cope withal, A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways, A scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants, Whom their o'er-cloyèd country vomits forth To desperate ventures and assured destruction. You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest; You having lands and blessed with beauteous wives, They would restrain the one, distain the other. And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow, Long kept in Brittany at our mother’s cost, A milksop, one that never in his life Felt so much cold as overshoes in snow? Let’s whip these stragglers o'er the seas again, Lash hence these overweening rags of France, These famished beggars weary of their lives, Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit, For want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves. If we be conquered, let men conquer us, And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped, And in record, left them the heirs of shame. Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives, Ravish our daughters?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark! I hear their drum. Fight, gentlemen of England.—Fight, bold yeomen.— Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head.— Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood. Amaze the welkin with your broken staves—
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
My lord, he doth deny to come.
Off with his son George’s head!
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.After the battle let George Stanley die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A thousand hearts are great within my bosom. Advance our standards. Set upon our foes. Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George, Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons. Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.
Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue! The king enacts more wonders than a man, Daring an opposite to every danger. His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death. Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
Withdraw, my lord. I’ll help you to a horse.
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast, And I will stand the hazard of the die. I think there be six Richmonds in the field; Five have I slain today instead of him. A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God and your arms be praised, victorious friends!The day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.
[offering him the crown] Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee. Lo, here this long-usurpèd royalty From the dead temples of this bloody wretch Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal. Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
What men of name are slain on either side?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]John Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Inter their bodies as becomes their births. Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled That in submission will return to us. And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament, We will unite the white rose and the red. Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction, That long have frowned upon their enmity. What traitor hears me and says not “Amen?” England hath long been mad and scarred herself. The brother blindly shed the brother’s blood. The father rashly slaughtered his own son. The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire. All this divided York and Lancaster, Divided, in their dire division. O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth, The true succeeders of each royal house, By God’s fair ordinance conjoin together, And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so, Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace, With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days! Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord, That would reduce these bloody days again, And make poor England weep in streams of blood! Let them not live to taste this land’s increase, That would with treason wound this fair land’s peace. Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again. That she may long live here, God say amen.
Two households, both alike in dignity In fair Verona, where we lay our scene, From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. From forth the fatal loins of these two foes A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, Whose misadventured piteous overthrows Doth with their death bury their parents' strife. The fearful passage of their death-marked love And the continuance of their parents' rage— Which but their children's end, naught could remove— Is now the two-hours' traffic of our stage; The which if you with patient ears attend, What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals.
No, for then we should be colliers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I mean, an we be in choler, we’ll draw.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
I strike quickly, being moved.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn’st away.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will takethe wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.
‘Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids. I will cut off their heads.
The heads of the maids?
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.Take it in what sense thou wilt.
They must take it in sense that feel it.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, and’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis well thou art not fish. If thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.Draw thy tool! Here comes of the house of Montagues.
My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
How? Turn thy back and run?
Fear me not.
No, marry. I fear thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let us take the law of our sides. Let them begin.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it. [He bites his thumb]
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
I do bite my thumb, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
[Aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say “ay”?
[Aside to SAMPSON] No.
No, sir. I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bitemy thumb, sir.
Do you quarrel, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a manas you.
No better.
Well, sir.
[Aside to SAMPSON] Say “better.” Here comes one of my master’s kinsmen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To ABRAHAM] Yes, better, sir.
You lie.
Draw, if you be men.—Gregory, remember thy washing blow.
[Draws his sword] Part, fools!Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?Turn thee, Benvolio. Look upon thy death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,Or manage it to part these men with me.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word,As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.Have at thee, coward!
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not. Let me go.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel!— Will they not hear? —What, ho! You men, you beasts, That quench the fire of your pernicious rage With purple fountains issuing from your veins, On pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground, And hear the sentence of your movèd prince. Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, By thee, old Capulet, and Montague, Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets And made Verona’s ancient Citizens Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments, To wield old partisans in hands as old, Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate. If ever you disturb our streets again, Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time, all the rest depart away. You, Capulet, shall go along with me, And, Montague, come you this afternoon To know our farther pleasure in this case, To old Free-town, our common judgment-place. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? Speak, nephew. Were you by when it began?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here were the servants of your adversary, And yours, close fighting ere I did approach. I drew to part them. In the instant came The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared, Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears, He swung about his head and cut the winds, Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn. While we were interchanging thrusts and blows, Came more and more and fought on part and part, Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Oh, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun Peered forth the golden window of the east, A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad, Where, underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from this city side, So early walking did I see your son. Towards him I made, but he was ‘ware of me And stole into the covert of the wood. I, measuring his affections by my own, Which then most sought where most might not be found, Being one too many by my weary self, Pursued my humor not pursuing his, And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew, Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs. But all so soon as the all-cheering sun Should in the farthest east begin to draw The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed, Away from light steals home my heavy son, And private in his chamber pens himself, Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out, And makes himself an artificial night. Black and portentous must this humor prove Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I neither know it nor can learn of him.
Have you importuned him by any means?
Both by myself and many other friends. But he, his own affections’ counselor, Is to himself—I will not say how true, But to himself so secret and so close, So far from sounding and discovery, As is the bud bit with an envious worm, Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, Or dedicate his beauty to the same. Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow. We would as willingly give cure as know.
See, where he comes. So please you, step aside.I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stayTo hear true shrift.—Come, madam, let’s away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, cousin.
Is the day so young?
But new struck nine.
Ay me! Sad hours seem long.Was that my father that went hence so fast?
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not having that which, having, makes them short.
In love?
Out.
Of love?
Out of her favor, where I am in love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still, Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! Where shall we dine? —O me! What fray was here? Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all. Here’s much to do with hate but more with love. Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate, O anything of nothing first created! O heavy lightness, serious vanity, Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms! Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health, Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! This love feel I, that feel no love in this. Dost thou not laugh?
No, coz, I rather weep.
Good heart, at what?
At thy good heart’s oppression.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, such is love’s transgression. Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, Which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown Doth add more grief to too much of mine own. Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs; Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes; Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears. What is it else? A madness most discreet, A choking gall, and a preserving sweet. Farewell, my coz.
Soft! I will go along.And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.This is not Romeo. He’s some other where.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Groan! Why, no. But sadly, tell me who.
A sick man in sadness makes his will,A word ill urged to one that is so ill. In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
A right good markman! And she’s fair I love.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, in that hit you miss. She’ll not be hit With Cupid’s arrow. She hath Dian’s wit. And, in strong proof of chastity well armed From love’s weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed. She will not stay the siege of loving terms, Nor bide th’ encounter of assailing eyes, Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold. Oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, For beauty, starved with her severity, Cuts beauty off from all posterity. She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, To merit bliss by making me despair. She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.
O, teach me how I should forget to think!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By giving liberty unto thine eyes.Examine other beauties.
‘Tis the way To call hers exquisite, in question more. These happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows, Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair. He that is strucken blind cannot forget The precious treasure of his eyesight lost. Show me a mistress that is passing fair; What doth her beauty serve but as a note Where I may read who passed that passing fair? Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
I'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike. And ’tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Of honorable reckoning are you both. And pity ’tis you lived at odds so long. But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But saying o’er what I have said before. My child is yet a stranger in the world. She hath not seen the change of fourteen years. Let two more summers wither in their pride Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
And too soon marred are those so early made. Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. She’s the hopeful lady of my earth. But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart. My will to her consent is but a part. An she agreed within her scope of choice, Lies my consent and fair according voice. This night I hold an old accustomed feast, Whereto I have invited many a guest Such as I love. And you among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more. At my poor house look to behold this night Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light. Such comfort as do lusty young men feel When well-appareled April on the heel Of limping winter treads. Even such delight Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see, And like her most whose merit most shall be— Which on more view of many, mine, being one, May stand in number, though in reckoning none, Come, go with me. [To PETER, giving him a paper] Go, sirrah, trudge about Through fair Verona. Find those persons out Whose names are written there, and to them say My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Find them out whose names are written here? It is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his penciland the painter with his nets. But I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned in good time!
Tut man, one fire burns out another’s burning. One pain is lessened by another’s anguish. Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning. One desperate grief cures with another’s languish. Take thou some new infection to thy eye, And the rank poison of the old will die.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
For what, I pray thee?
For your broken shin.
Why Romeo, art thou mad?
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,Shut up in prison, kept without my food,Whipped and tormented and—Good e’en, good fellow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God ‘i’ good e’en. I pray, sir, can you read?
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stay, fellow. I can read. [He reads the letter] “Seigneur Martino and his wife and daughters; County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; The lady widow of Vitruvio; Seigneur Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; My fair niece Rosaline and Livia; Seigneur Valentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively Helena.” A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
Up.
Whither?
To supper; to our house.
Whose house?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My master’s.
Indeed, I should have asked thee that before.
Now I’ll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest youmerry!
At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves With all the admired beauties of Verona. Go thither, and with unattainted eye Compare her face with some that I shall show, And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires, And these, who, often drowned, could never die, Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, Herself poised with herself in either eye. But in that crystal scales let there be weighed Your lady’s love against some other maid That I will show you shining at the feast, And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year oldI bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird!God forbid! Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!
How now, who calls?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your mother.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
This is the matter.—Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret. —Nurse, come back again. I have remembered me. Thou’s hear our counsel. Thou know’st my daughter’s of a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
She’s not fourteen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth—and yet, to my teen be itspoken, I have but four—she is not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammastide?
A fortnight and odd days.
Even or odd, of all days in the year, Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. Susan and she—God rest all Christian souls!— Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God. She was too good for me. But, as I said, On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. That shall she. Marry, I remember it well. ‘Tis since the earthquake now eleven years, And she was weaned—I never shall forget it— Of all the days of the year, upon that day. For I had then laid wormwood to my dug, Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. My lord and you were then at Mantua.— Nay, I do bear a brain. —But, as I said, When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! “Shake!” quoth the dovehouse. ‘Twas no need, I trow, To bid me trudge. And since that time it is eleven years, For then she could stand alone. Nay, by the rood, She could have run and waddled all about, For even the day before, she broke her brow. And then my husband—God be with his soul! He was a merry man—took up the child. “Yea,” quoth he, “Dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit, Wilt thou not, Jule?” and, by my holy dame, The pretty wretch left crying and said “ay.” To see now, how a jest shall come about! I warrant, an I should live a thousand years, I never should forget it. “Wilt thou not, Jule?” quoth he. And, pretty fool, it stinted and said “ay.”
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.
Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh To think it should leave crying and say “ay.” And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow A bump as big as a young cockerel’s stone, A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. “Yea,” quoth my husband, “Fall’st upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age. Wilt thou not, Jule?” It stinted and said “ay.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace! Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nursed. An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Marry, that “marry” is the very themeI came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,How stands your disposition to be married?
It is an honor that I dream not of.
An honor! Were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you Here in Verona, ladies of esteem Are made already mothers. By my count, I was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief: The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a manAs all the world. Why, he’s a man of wax.
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.
Nay, he’s a flower. In faith, a very flower.
What say you? Can you love the gentleman? This night you shall behold him at our feast. Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen. Examine every married lineament And see how one another lends content, And what obscured in this fair volume lies Find written in the margin of his eyes. This precious book of love, this unbound lover, To beautify him only lacks a cover. The fish lives in the sea, and ’tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide. That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory That in gold clasps locks in the golden story. So shall you share all that he doth possess By having him, making yourself no less.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris, love?
I’ll look to like if looking liking move. But no more deep will I endart mine eyeThan your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed in thepantry, and every thing in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you, follow straight.
We follow thee.—Juliet, the county stays.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?Or shall we on without apology?
The date is out of such prolixity. We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath, Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper, Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke After the prompter for our entrance. But let them measure us by what they will. We’ll measure them a measure and be gone.
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes With nimble soles. I have a soul of leadSo stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid’s wingsAnd soar with them above a common bound.
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft To soar with his light feathers, and so bound, I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.
And to sink in it, should you burthen love—Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If love be rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.— Give me a case to put my visage in! A visor for a visor. —What care I What curious eye doth cote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Come, knock and enter. And no sooner inBut every man betake him to his legs.
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels. For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase, I’ll be a candle holder, and look on. The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.
Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word. If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire, Or—save your reverence—love, wherein thou stick’st Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Nay, that’s not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I mean, sir, in delay. We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day. Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
And we mean well in going to this mask,But ’tis no wit to go.
Why, may one ask?
I dreamt a dream tonight.
And so did I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, what was yours?
That dreamers often lie.
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.
Oh, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Queen Mab, what’s she?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes In shape no bigger than an agate stone On the forefinger of an alderman, Drawn with a team of little atomi Over men’s noses as they lie asleep. Her wagon spokes made of long spinners’ legs, The cover of the wings of grasshoppers, Her traces of the smallest spider’s web, Her collars of the moonshine’s watery beams, Her whip of cricket’s bone, the lash of film, Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat, Not half so big as a round little worm Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid. Her chariot is an empty hazelnut Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers. And in this state she gallops night by night Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love; On courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight; O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees; O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream, Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues, Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. Sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose, And then dreams he of smelling out a suit. And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail Tickling a parson’s nose as he lies asleep, Then he dreams of another benefice. Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck, And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades, Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two And sleeps again. This is that very Mab That plaits the manes of horses in the night And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes. This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, That presses them and learns them first to bear, Making them women of good carriage. This is she—
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!Thou talk’st of nothing.
True, I talk of dreams, Which are the children of an idle brain, Begot of nothing but vain fantasy, Which is as thin of substance as the air And more inconstant than the wind, who woos Even now the frozen bosom of the north, And, being angered, puffs away from thence, Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
This wind you talk of, blows us from ourselves.Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
I fear too early, for my mind misgives Some consequence yet hanging in the stars Shall bitterly begin his fearful date With this night’s revels, and expire the term Of a despisèd life closed in my breast By some vile forfeit of untimely death. But he that hath the steerage of my course, Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Strike, drum.
Where’s Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a trencher!
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men’s hands, and they unwashed too, ’tis a foul thing.
Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard,look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.—Antony and Potpan!
Ay, boy, ready.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be briska while, and the longer liver take all.
Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you. Ah, my mistresses! Which of you all Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty, She, I’ll swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now?— Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day That I have worn a visor and could tell A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear Such as would please. ‘Tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone.— You are welcome, gentlemen.—Come, musicians, play. [Music plays and they dance] A hall, a hall, give room!—And foot it, girls.— More light, you knaves! And turn the tables up, And quench the fire. The room is grown too hot.— Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.— Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet, For you and I are past our dancing days. How long is ’t now since last yourself and I Were in a mask?
By’r Lady, thirty years.
What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much. ‘Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio, Come Pentecost as quickly as it will, Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis more, ’tis more. His son is elder, sir.His son is thirty.
Will you tell me that?His son was but a ward two years ago.
[To a SERVINGMAN] What lady is that which doth enrich the handOf yonder knight?
I know not, sir.
Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope’s ear, Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear. So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows. The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand, And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand. Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight! For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This, by his voice, should be a Montague.— [To his PAGE] Fetch me my rapier, boy.— What, dares the slave Come hither, covered with an antic face, To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now, by the stock and honor of my kin, To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,A villain that is hither come in spiteTo scorn at our solemnity this night.
Young Romeo is it?
‘Tis he, that villain Romeo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone. He bears him like a portly gentleman, And, to say truth, Verona brags of him To be a virtuous and well-governed youth. I would not for the wealth of all the town Here in my house do him disparagement. Therefore be patient. Take no note of him. It is my will, the which if thou respect, Show a fair presence and put off these frowns, An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
It fits when such a villain is a guest. I’ll not endure him.
He shall be endured. What, goodman boy! I say, he shall. Go to. Am I the master here, or you? Go to. You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul, You’ll make a mutiny among my guests. You will set cock-a-hoop. You’ll be the man!
Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.
Go to, go to. You are a saucy boy. Is ’t so, indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what. You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time.— Well said, my hearts! —You are a princox, go. Be quiet, or —More light, more light! —For shame! I’ll make you quiet. —What, cheerly, my hearts!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Patience perforce with willful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall Now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.
[Taking JULIET’s hand] If I profane with my unworthiesthand This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this: My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this, For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.
Then move not, while my prayer’s effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again.
You kiss by th’ book.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
What is her mother?
Marry, bachelor, Her mother is the lady of the house, And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. I nursed her daughter that you talked withal. I tell you, he that can lay hold of her Shall have the chinks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Is she a Capulet?O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.
[To ROMEO] Away, begone. The sport is at the best.
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone. We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.— Is it e’en so? Why, then, I thank you all. I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.— More torches here!—Come on then, let’s to bed. Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late. I’ll to my rest.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The son and heir of old Tiberio.
What’s he that now is going out of door?
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?
I know not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go ask his name.
If he be married.My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
[Returning] His name is Romeo, and a Montague,The only son of your great enemy.
[Aside] My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me, That I must love a loathèd enemy.
What’s this? What’s this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A rhyme I learned even nowOf one I danced withal.
Anon, anon. Come, let's away. The strangers are all gone.
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir. That fair for which love groaned for and would die, With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair. Now Romeo is beloved and loves again, Alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks; But to his foe supposed he must complain, And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks. Being held a foe, he may not have access To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear, And she as much in love, her means much less To meet her new belovèd anywhere. But passion lends them power, time means, to meet, Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
Romeo, my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is wise,And, on my life, hath stol’n him home to bed.
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.Call, good Mercutio.
Nay, I’ll conjure too! Romeo! Humours, madman, passion, lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh! Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied. Cry but “Ay me!” Pronounce but “love” and “dove.” Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word, One nickname for her purblind son and heir, Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.— He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not. The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.— I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes, By her high forehead and her scarlet lip, By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, And the demesnes that there adjacent lie, That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him. ‘Twould anger him To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle Of some strange nature, letting it there stand Till she had laid it and conjured it down. That were some spite. My invocation Is fair and honest. In his mistress’ name I conjure only but to raise up him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To be consorted with the humorous night.Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. Now will he sit under a medlar tree And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.— O Romeo, that she were! Oh, that she were An open arse, and thou a poperin pear. Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle bed. This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.— Come, shall we go?
Go then, for 'tis in vainTo seek him here that means not to be found.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound. But soft! What light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, Who is already sick and pale with grief, That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she. Be not her maid since she is envious. Her vestal livery is but sick and green, And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off! It is my lady. Oh, it is my love. Oh, that she knew she were! She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that? Her eye discourses. I will answer it.— I am too bold. ‘Tis not to me she speaks. Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there, they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars As daylight doth a lamp. Her eye in heaven Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. Oh, that I were a glove upon that hand That I might touch that cheek!
Ay me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] She speaks. O, speak again, bright angel! For thou art As glorious to this night, being o’er my head, As is a wingèd messenger of heaven Unto the white, upturnèd, wondering eyes Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds And sails upon the bosom of the air.
O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name. Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.
[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
‘Tis but thy name that is my enemy. Thou art thyself, though not a Montague. What’s Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot, Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part Belonging to a man. O, be some other name! What’s in a name? That which we call a rose By any other word would smell as sweet. So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called, Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name, And for that name, which is no part of thee Take all myself.
I take thee at thy word. Call me but love, and I’ll be new baptized.Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,So stumblest on my counsel?
By a name I know not how to tell thee who I am. My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself Because it is an enemy to thee. Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred wordsOf that tongue’s uttering, yet I know the sound. Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb, And the place death, considering who thou art, If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls, For stony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do, that dares love attempt. Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
If they do see thee they will murder thee.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eyeThan twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,And I am proof against their enmity.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes, And but thou love me, let them find me here. My life were better ended by their hate Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By whose direction found’st thou out this place?
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire. He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes. I am no pilot. Yet, wert thou as far As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea, I would adventure for such merchandise.
Thou know’st the mask of night is on my face, Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. Fain would I dwell on form. Fain, fain deny What I have spoke. But farewell compliment! Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say “ay,” And I will take thy word. Yet if thou swear’st Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries, They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. Or if thou think’st I am too quickly won, I’ll frown and be perverse and say thee nay, So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world. In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, And therefore thou mayst think my ‘havior light. But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true Than those that have more coying to be strange. I should have been more strange, I must confess, But that thou overheard’st, ere I was ‘ware, My true love’s passion. Therefore pardon me, And not impute this yielding to light love, Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—
O, swear not by the moon, th’ inconstant moon, That monthly changes in her circle orb,Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What shall I swear by?
Do not swear at all.Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,Which is the god of my idolatry, And I’ll believe thee.
If my heart’s dear love—
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract tonight. It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden, Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be Ere one can say “It lightens.” Sweet, good night. This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Th’ exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,And yet I would it were to give again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
But to be frank, and give it thee again. And yet I wish but for the thing I have. My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep. The more I give to thee, The more I have, for both are infinite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.—Anon, good Nurse!—Sweet Montague, be true.Stay but a little. I will come again.
O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard, Being in night, all this is but a dream,Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed. If that thy bent of love be honorable, Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow By one that I’ll procure to come to thee Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite, And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
[From within] Madam!
I come, anon.—But if thou mean’st not well,I do beseech thee—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][From within] Madam!
By and by, I come.—To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. Tomorrow will I send.
So thrive my soul—
A thousand times good night!
A thousand times the worse to want thy light. Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books, But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hist! Romeo, hist!—Oh, for a falconer’s voice, To lure this tassel-gentle back again! Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud, Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies, And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine, With repetition of “My Romeo!”
It is my soul that calls upon my name. How silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night, Like softest music to attending ears!
Romeo!
My nyas?
What o’clock tomorrowShall I send to thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By the hour of nine.
I will not fail. ‘Tis twenty year till then.I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,Remembering how I love thy company.
And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,Forgetting any other home but this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone. And yet no further than a wanton’s bird, That lets it hop a little from his hand Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, And with a silken thread plucks it back again, So loving-jealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy bird.
Sweet, so would I. Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing. Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest, Hence will I to my ghostly sire's close cell,His help to crave, and my deap hap to tell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, Checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels From forth day’s path and Titan’s fiery wheels. Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, The day to cheer and night’s dank dew to dry, I must upfill this osier cage of ours With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers. The earth, that’s natu re’s mother, is her tomb. What is her burying, grave that is her womb. And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find, Many for many virtues excellent, None but for some and yet all different. Oh, mickle is the powerful grace that lies In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities. For naught so vile that on the earth doth live But to the earth some special good doth give. Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse. Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, And vice sometime by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower Poison hath residence and medicine power. For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. Two such opposèd kings encamp them still, In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will. And where the worser is predominant, Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Good morrow, Father.
Benedicite. What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? Young son, it argues a distempered head So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye, And where care lodges, sleep will never lie. But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. Therefore thy earliness doth me assure Thou art uproused by some distemperature. Or if not so, then here I hit it right: Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostly Father? No.I have forgot that name and that name’s woe.
That’s my good son. But where hast thou been, then?
I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. I have been feasting with mine enemy, Where on a sudden one hath wounded me, That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies Within thy help and holy physic lies. I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo, My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet. As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine, And all combined, save what thou must combine By holy marriage. When and where and how We met, we wooed and made exchange of vow, I’ll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray: That thou consent to marry us today.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here! Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline! How much salt water thrown away in waste To season love that of it doth not taste! The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears. Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit Of an old tear that is not washed off yet. If e’er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline. And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then: Women may fall when there’s no strength in men.
Thou chid’st me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And badest me bury love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not in a grave,To lay one in, another out to have.
I pray thee, chide not. Her I love nowDoth grace for grace and love for love allow.The other did not so.
Oh, she knew well Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. But come, young waverer, come, go with me, In one respect I’ll thy assistant be, For this alliance may so happy prove To turn your households’ rancor to pure love.
Oh, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where the devil should this Romeo be?Came he not home tonight?
Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.
A challenge, on my life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Romeo will answer it.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared.
Alas, poor Romeo! He is already dead, stabbed with a white wench’s black eye, shot through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt shaft. And is he a man to encounterTybalt?
Why, what is Tybalt?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]More than Prince of Cats. Oh, he’s the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. He rests his minim rests—one, two, and the third in your bosom. The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!
The what?
The pox on such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! “By Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good whore!” Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these “pardon me’s,” who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the oldbench? Oh, their bones, their bones!
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh,how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench— marry, she had a better love to berhyme her— Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. — Signior Romeo, bonjour! There’s a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
That’s as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Meaning “to curtsy”?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast most kindly hit it.
A most courteous exposition.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Pink for flower.
Right.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then is my pump well flowered.
Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.
Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits faints.
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I’ll cry a match.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with youthere for the goose?
Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast notthere for the goose.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. It is a most sharp sauce.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And is it not well served into a sweet goose?
Oh, here’s a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
I stretch it out for that word “broad,” which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Nowart thou sociable. Now art thou Romeo. Now art thou what thou art—by art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lollingup and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Stop there, stop there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Oh, thou art deceived. I would have made it short, forI was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
Here’s goodly gear.
A sail, a sail!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Two, two—a shirt and a smock.
Peter!
Anon!
My fan, Peter.
Good, Peter, to hide her face, for her fan’s the fairerface.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
God ye good e’en, fair gentlewoman.
Is it good e’en?
‘Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Out upon you! What a man are you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself to mar.
By my troth, it is well said. “For himself to mar,” quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am theyoungest of that name, for fault of a worse.
You say well.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i’ faith, wisely, wisely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
She will indite him to some supper.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
What hast thou found?
No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten pie—that is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent. [Sings] An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in Lent. But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score When it hoars ere it be spent. [He speaks] Romeo, will you come to your father’s? We’ll to dinner, thither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will follow you.
Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady, lady.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to ina month.
An he speak any thing against me, I’ll take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, I’ll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills. I am none of his skains-mates. [To PETER] And thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon as another man if I see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! [To ROMEO] Pray you, sir, a word.And as I told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. What she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool’s paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. For the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, trulyit were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee—
Good heart, and i’ faith, I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Bid her devise Some means to come to shrift this afternoon. And there she shall at Friar Lawrence’ cell Be shrived and married. [Gives her coins] Here is for thy pains.
No, truly, sir. Not a penny.
Go to. I say you shall.
[Takes the money] This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And stay, good Nurse. Behind the abbey wall Within this hour my man shall be with thee And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, Which to the high top-gallant of my joy Must be my convoy in the secret night. Farewell. Be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains. Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?
Is your man secret? Did you ne’er hear say,“Two may keep counsel, putting one away?”
Warrant thee, my man’s as true as steel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.—Lord, Lord! when ’twas a little prating thing.—Oh, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man. But, I’ll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin bothwith a letter?
Ay, Nurse, what of that? Both with an R.
Ah, mocker, that’s the dog’s name. R is for the—No, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
Commend me to thy lady.
Ay, a thousand times —Peter!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Anon!
[Giving PETER her fan] Before, and apace.
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse. In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so. Oh, she is lame! Love’s heralds should be thoughts, Which ten times faster glide than the sun’s beams, Driving back shadows over louring hills. Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve Is three long hours, yet she is not come. Had she affections and warm youthful blood, She would be as swift in motion as a ball. My words would bandy her to my sweet love, And his to me. But old folks, many feign as they were dead, Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead. O God, she comes.—O honey Nurse, what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away .
Peter, stay at the gate.
Now, good sweet Nurse— O Lord, why look’st thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily. If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news.Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good Nurse, speak.
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath To say to me that thou art out of breath? The excuse that thou dost make in this delay Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. Is thy news good, or bad? Answer to that. Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance. Let me be satisfied. Is ’t good or bad?
Well, you have made a simple choice. You know not how to choose a man. Romeo! No, not he, though his face be better than any man’s, yet his leg excels all men’s, andfor a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not tobe talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I’ll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at home?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, no. But all this did I know before.What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I! It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. My back a’ t’ other side. Ah, my back, my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about, To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
I’ faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, avirtuous— Where is your mother?
Where is my mother? Why, she is within. Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest! “Your love says, like an honest gentleman, ‘Where is your mother?’”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God’s lady dear, Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow. Is this the poultice for my aching bones? Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
I have.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’s cell. There stays a husband to make you a wife. Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks. They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news. Hie you to church. I must another way To fetch a ladder, by the which your love Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark. I am the drudge and toil in your delight, But you shall bear the burden soon at night. Go. I’ll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.
So smile the heavens upon this holy actThat after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of joy That one short minute gives me in her sight. Do thou but close our hands with holy words, Then love-devouring death do what he dare; It is enough I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness And in the taste confounds the appetite. Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so. Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady. Oh, so light a foot Will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint. A lover may bestride the gossamers That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall. So light is vanity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath This neighbor air, and let rich music’s tongue Unfold the imagined happiness that both Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, Brags of his substance, not of ornament. They are but beggars that can count their worth. But my true love is grown to such excess I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come with me, and we will make short work, For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire. The day is hot; the Capulets, abroad; And if we meet we shall not ’scape a brawl, For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword uponthe table and says “God send me no need of thee!” and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.
Am I like such a fellow?
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And what to?
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel witha man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thouhast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep inthe sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With another, fortying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
The fee simple? O simple!
By my head, here comes the Capulets.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By my heel, I care not.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them. Gentlemen, good e’en. A word with one of you.
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something. Make it a word and a blow.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mercutio, thou consort’st with Romeo.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords.Here’s my fiddlestick. Here’s that shall make you dance. Zounds, “consort”!
We talk here in the public haunt of men. Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Men’s eyes were made to look and let them gaze. I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower.Your worship in that sense may call him “man.”
Romeo, the love I bear thee can affordNo better term than this: thou art a villain.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee Doth much excuse the appertaining rage To such a greeting. Villain am I none. Therefore, farewell. I see thou know’st me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuriesThat thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.
I do protest I never injured thee, But love thee better than thou canst devise, Till thou shalt know the reason of my love. And so, good Capulet—which name I tender As dearly as my own—be satisfied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O calm dishonourable, vile submission!Alla stoccata carries it away. [Draws his sword] Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
What wouldst thou have with me?
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives,that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
I am for you. [He draws his sword]
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, sir, your passado.
[Draws his sword] Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons. Gentlemen, for shame! Forbear this outrage. Tybalt, Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath Forbidden bandying in Verona streets. Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Away, Tybalt.
I am hurt.A plague o’ both your houses! I am sped.Is he gone and hath nothing?
What, art thou hurt?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, ’tis enough. Where is my page?—Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
No, ’tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but ’tis enough, ’twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o’ both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
I thought all for the best.
Help me into some house, Benvolio, Or I shall faint. A plague o’ both your houses! They have made worms’ meat of me. I have it, And soundly too. Your houses!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally, My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt In my behalf. My reputation stained With Tybalt’s slander. —Tybalt, that an hour Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet, Thy beauty hath made me effeminate And in my temper softened valor’s steel!
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This day’s black fate on more days doth depend.This but begins the woe others must end.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Alive in triumph—and Mercutio slain! Away to heaven, respective lenity, And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now. Now, Tybalt, take the “villain” back again That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio’s soul Is but a little way above our heads, Staying for thine to keep him company. Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him hereShalt with him hence.
This shall determine that.
Romeo, away, be gone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Oh, I am fortune’s fool!
Why dost thou stay?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which way ran he that killed Mercutio? Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
[To TYBALT] Up, sir, go with me.I charge thee in the Prince’s name, obey.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
O noble prince, I can discover all The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother’s child! O Prince! O cousin! Husband! Oh, the blood is spilled Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true, For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. O cousin, cousin!
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Tybalt here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay. Romeo, that spoke him fair, bade him bethink How nice the quarrel was and urged withal Your high displeasure. All this uttered With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed, Could not take truce with the unruly spleen Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast, Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats Cold death aside and with the other sends It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity, Retorts it. Romeo, he cries aloud, “Hold, friends! Friends, part!” and, swifter than his tongue, His agile arm beats down their fatal points, And ’twixt them rushes—underneath whose arm An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled. But by and by comes back to Romeo, Who had but newly entertained revenge, And to ’t they go like lightning, for ere I Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain. And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly. This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Montague. Affection makes him false. He speaks not true. Some twenty of them fought in this black strife, And all those twenty could but kill one life. I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give. Romeo slew Tybalt. Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio’s friend.His fault concludes but what the law should end,The life of Tybalt.
And for that offense Immediately we do exile him hence. I have an interest in your hate's proceeding; My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding. But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine That you shall all repent the loss of mine. I will be deaf to pleading and excuses. Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses. Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste, Else, when he is found, that hour is his last. Bear hence this body, and attend our will. Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Toward Phoebus’ lodging. Such a wagoner As Phaeton would whip you to the west And bring in cloudy night immediately. Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, That runaways’ eyes may wink, and Romeo Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen. Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties, or, if love be blind, It best agrees with night. Come, civil night, Thou sober-suited matron, all in black, And learn me how to lose a winning match Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. Hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks, With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold, Think true love acted simple modesty. Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in night, For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back. Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-browed night, Give me my Romeo. And when I shall die, Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun. Oh, I have bought the mansion of a love, But not possessed it, and though I am sold, Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new robes And may not wear them.
Oh, here comes my Nurse, And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.— Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The cords That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Ay, ay, the cords.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ah, weraday! He’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead!We are undone, lady, we are undone!Alack the day! He’s gone, he’s killed, he’s dead!
Can heaven be so envious?
Romeo can,Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus? This torture should be roared in dismal hell. Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but “ay,” And that bare vowel I shall poison more Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. I am not I if there be such an I, Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer “ay.” If he be slain, say “ay,” or if not, “no.” Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes— God save the mark!—here on his manly breast. A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse. Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood, All in gore blood. I swoonèd at the sight.
O, break, my heart, poor bankrupt, break at once! To prison, eyes, ne’er look on liberty. Vile earth, to earth resign. End motion here, And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!O courteous Tybalt! Honest gentleman!That ever I should live to see thee dead.
What storm is this that blows so contrary? Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead? My dearest cousin and my dearer lord? Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! For who is living if those two are gone?
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banishèd.Romeo that killed him—he is banishèd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O God, did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?
It did, it did. Alas the day, it did.
O serpent heart hid with a flowering face! Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? Beautiful tyrant! Fiend angelical! Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb! Despisèd substance of divinest show, Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st. A damnèd saint, an honorable villain! O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend In moral paradise of such sweet flesh? Was ever book containing such vile matter So fairly bound? Oh, that deceit should dwell In such a gorgeous palace!
There’s no trust, No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured, All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. Ah, where’s my man?—Give me some aqua vitae.— These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old. Shame come to Romeo!
Blistered be thy tongue For such a wish! He was not born to shame. Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit, For ’tis a throne where honor may be crowned. Sole monarch of the universal earth, Oh, what a beast was I to chide at him!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband? Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, When I, thy three hours’ wife, have mangled it? But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? That villain cousin would have killed my husband. Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring. Your tributary drops belong to woe, Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy. My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain, And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband. All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then? Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death, That murdered me. I would forget it fain, But oh, it presses to my memory, Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners’ minds. “Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banishèd.” That “banishèd,” that one word “banishèd” Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death Was woe enough, if it had ended there. Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship And needly will be ranked with other griefs, Why followed not, when she said “Tybalt’s dead,” “Thy father” or “thy mother,” nay, or both, Which modern lamentations might have moved? But with a rearward following Tybalt’s death, “Romeo is banishèd.” To speak that word, Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, All slain, all dead. “Romeo is banishèd.” There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, In that word’s death. No words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corse. Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment. Take up those cords.—Poor ropes, you are beguiled, Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled. He made you for a highway to my bed, But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd. Come, cords.—Come, Nurse. I’ll to my wedding bed. And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo To comfort you. I wot well where he is. Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night. I’ll to him. He is hid at Lawrence’ cell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Giving her a ring] O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight, And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Romeo, come forth. Come forth, thou fearful man.Affliction is enamoured of thy parts,And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my handThat I yet know not?
Too familiarIs my dear son with such sour company.I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.
Ha, banishment! Be merciful, say “death,”For exile hath more terror in his look,Much more than death. Do not say “banishment.”
Hence from Verona art thou banishèd.Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Verona walls But purgatory, torture, hell itself. Hence “banishèd” is banished from the world, And world’s exile is death. Then “banishèd,” Is death mistermed. Calling death “banishment,” Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden ax And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness! Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince, Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law, And turned that black word “death” to “banishment.” This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]‘Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here, Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog And little mouse, every unworthy thing, Live here in heaven and may look on her, But Romeo may not. More validity, More honorable state, more courtship lives In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand And steal immortal blessing from her lips, Who even in pure and vestal modesty, Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin. But Romeo may not. He is banishèd. Flies may do this, but I from this must fly. They are free men, but I am banishèd. And sayst thou yet that exile is not death? Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife, No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean, But “banishèd” to kill me?—“Banishèd”! O Friar, the damnèd use that word in hell. Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart, Being a divine, a ghostly confessor, A sin-absolver, and my friend professed, To mangle me with that word “banishèd”?
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
I’ll give thee armor to keep off that word— Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy—To comfort thee though thou art banishèd.
Yet “banishèd”? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet, Displant a town, reverse a prince’s doom, It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, then I see that madmen have no ears.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love, An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd, Doting like me, and like me banishèd, Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair And fall upon the ground, as I do now, Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,Mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.
Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo, arise. Thou wilt be taken.—Stay awhile.—Stand up.
Run to my study.—By and by!—God’s will,What simpleness is this!—I come, I come.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What’s your will?
[From within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand. I come from Lady Juliet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Opens the door] Welcome then.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,Where is my lady’s lord? Where’s Romeo?
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Oh, he is even in my mistress’ case, Just in her case. O woeful sympathy, Piteous predicament! Even so lies she, Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. Stand up, stand up. Stand, an you be a man. For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand. Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Nurse!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ah sir, ah sir. Death’s the end of all.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her? Doth she not think me an old murderer, Now I have stained the childhood of our joy With blood removed but little from her own? Where is she? And how doth she? And what says My concealed lady to our canceled love?
Oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps, And now falls on her bed, and then starts up, And “Tybalt” calls, and then on Romeo cries, And then down falls again.
As if that name, Shot from the deadly level of a gun, Did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand Murdered her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me, In what vile part of this anatomy Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack The hateful mansion. [He draws his dagger]
Hold thy desperate hand. Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art. Thy tears are womanish. Thy wild acts denote The unreasonable fury of a beast. Unseemly woman in a seeming man, And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order, I thought thy disposition better tempered. Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself, And slay thy lady that in thy life lives By doing damnèd hate upon thyself? Why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth? Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose? Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit, Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all And usest none in that true use indeed Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit. Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, Digressing from the valor of a man; Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, Misshapen in the conduct of them both, Like powder in a skill-less soldier’s flask, Is set afire by thine own ignorance; And thou dismembered with thine own defence. What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive, For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead— There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee, But thou slew’st Tybalt—there art thou happy. The law that threatened death becomes thy friend And turns it to exile—there art thou happy. A pack of blessings light upon thy back, Happiness courts thee in her best array, But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, Thou pout’st upon thy fortune and thy love. Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable. Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed. Ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her. But look thou stay not till the watch be set, For then thou canst not pass to Mantua, Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.— Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady, And bid her hasten all the house to bed, Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. Romeo is coming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night To hear good counsel. Oh, what learning is!My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. [Gives ROMEO JULIET’s ring] Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Go hence. Good night. And here stands all your state: Either be gone before the watch be set, Or by the break of day disguised from hence. Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man, And he shall signify from time to time Every good hap to you that chances here. Give me thy hand. ‘Tis late. Farewell, good night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But that a joy past joy calls out on me, It were a grief so brief to part with thee. Farewell.
Things have fall’n out, sir, so unluckily, That we have had no time to move our daughter. Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I. Well, we were born to die. ‘Tis very late. She’ll not come down tonight. I promise you, but for your company, I would have been abed an hour ago.
These times of woe afford no time to woo.Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.Tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my child’s love. I think she will be ruled In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.— Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed. Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love, And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next— But, soft! What day is this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Monday, my lord.
Monday! Ha, ha. Well, Wednesday is too soon, O’ Thursday let it be.—O’ Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl.— Will you be ready? Do you like this haste? We’ll keep no great ado, a friend or two. For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late, It may be thought we held him carelessly, Being our kinsman, if we revel much. Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends, And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Well, get you gone. O' Thursday be it then. [To his wife] Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed. Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.— Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!— Afore me, it is so very late that we May call it early by and by. Good night.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day. It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree. Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It was the lark, the herald of the morn, No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I. It is some meteor that the sun exhales To be to thee this night a torchbearer, And light thee on thy way to Mantua. Therefore stay yet. Thou need’st not to be gone.
Let me be ta’en. Let me be put to death. I am content, so thou wilt have it so. I’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye. ‘Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia’s brow. Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads. I have more care to stay than will to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.— How is ’t, my soul? Let’s talk. It is not day.
It is, it is. Hie hence! Be gone, away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune, Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. Some say the lark makes sweet division. This doth not so, for she divideth us. Some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes. Oh, now I would they had changed voices too, Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day. O, now be gone. More light and light it grows.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam.
Nurse?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber. The day is broke. Be wary, look about.
Then, window, let day in and let life out.
Farewell, farewell. One kiss, and I’ll descend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Art thou gone so, love, lord? Ay, husband, friend, I must hear from thee every day in the hour, For in a minute there are many days. Oh, by this count I shall be much in years Ere I again behold my Romeo.
Farewell!I will omit no opportunityThat may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Oh, think’st thou we shall ever meet again?
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serveFor sweet discourses in our time to come.
O God, I have an ill-divining soul. Methinks I see thee now, thou art so low As one dead in the bottom of a tomb. Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle. If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, fortune, For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long, But send him back.
[From within] Ho, daughter, are you up?
Who is ’t that calls? Is it my lady mother?Is she not down so late or up so early?What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Why, how now, Juliet?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I am not well.
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death? What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. Therefore, have done. Some grief shows much of love, But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friendWhich you weep for.
Feeling so the loss,Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death,As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
What villain, madam?
That same villain, Romeo.
[Aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder. [To LADY CAPULET] God pardon him! I do, with all my heart,And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death!
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banished runagate doth live, Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram That he shall soon keep Tybalt company. And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied With Romeo, till I behold him—dead— Is my poor heart for a kinsman vexed. Madam, if you could find out but a man To bear a poison, I would temper it, That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof, Soon sleep in quiet. Oh, how my heart abhors To hear him named, and cannot come to him. To wreak the love I bore my cousin Upon his body that slaughtered him!
Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man.But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.What are they, beseech your ladyship?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child. One who, to put thee from thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy That thou expect’st not, nor I looked not for.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn, The gallant, young, and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church, Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Now, by Saint Peter’s Church and Peter too, He shall not make me there a joyful bride. I wonder at this haste, that I must wed Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo. I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam, I will not marry yet. And when I do, I swear It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate, Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew, But for the sunset of my brother’s son It rains downright. How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears, Evermore showering? In one little body Thou counterfeit’st a bark, a sea, a wind, For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea, Do ebb and flow with tears. The bark thy body is, Sailing in this salt flood. The winds thy sighs, Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them, Without a sudden calm will overset Thy tempest-tossèd body. —How now, wife? Have you delivered to her our decree?
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks. I would the fool were married to her grave!
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife. How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks? Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed, Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.Proud can I never be of what I hate,But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic! What is this? “Proud,” and “I thank you,” and “I thank you not,” And yet “not proud”? Mistress minion you, Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, But fettle your fine joints ‘gainst Thursday next To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church, Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither. Out, you green sickness, carrion! Out, you baggage! You tallow face!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
Good Father, I beseech you on my knees,Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Hang thee, young baggage! Disobedient wretch! I tell thee what: get thee to church o’ Thursday, Or never after look me in the face. Speak not. Reply not. Do not answer me. My fingers itch.—Wife, we scarce thought us blest That God had lent us but this only child, But now I see this one is one too much And that we have a curse in having her. Out on her, hilding!
God in heaven bless her!You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,Good prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I speak no treason.
Oh, God ‘i’ good e’en.
May not one speak?
Peace, you mumbling fool!Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl, For here we need it not.
You are too hot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God’s bread! It makes me mad. Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, Alone, in company, still my care hath been To have her matched. And having now provided A gentleman of noble parentage, Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained, Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, Proportioned as one’s thought would wish a man— And then to have a wretched puling fool, A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender, To answer “I’ll not wed,” “I cannot love,” “I am too young,” “I pray you, pardon me.”— But, an you will not wed, I’ll pardon you. Graze where you will, you shall not house with me. Look to ’t, think on ’t, I do not use to jest. Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart, advise. An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend. An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, For, by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee, Nor what is mine shall never do thee good. Trust to ’t, bethink you. I’ll not be forsworn.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds That sees into the bottom of my grief?— O sweet my mother, cast me not away! Delay this marriage for a month, a week. Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
O God!—O Nurse, how shall this be prevented? My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. How shall that faith return again to earth, Unless that husband send it me from heaven By leaving earth? Comfort me. Counsel me.— Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems Upon so soft a subject as myself.— What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort, Nurse.
Faith, here it is. Romeo is banishèd, and all the world to nothing That he dares ne’er come back to challenge you. Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth. Then, since the case so stands as now it doth, I think it best you married with the county. Oh, he’s a lovely gentleman. Romeo’s a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam, Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart, I think you are happy in this second match, For it excels your first. Or if it did not, Your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were, As living here and you no use of him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Speakest thou from thy heart?
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
Amen!
What?
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much. Go in, and tell my lady I am gone, Having displeased my father, to Lawrence’s cell To make confession and to be absolved.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend! Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue Which she hath praised him with above compare So many thousand times? Go, counselor! Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. I'll to the friar, to know his remedy. If all else fail, myself have power to die.
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
My father Capulet will have it so,And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
You say you do not know the lady’s mind. Uneven is the course. I like it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death, And therefore have I little talked of love, For Venus smiles not in a house of tears. Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous That she do give her sorrow so much sway, And in his wisdom hastes our marriage To stop the inundation of her tears— Which, too much minded by herself alone, May be put from her by society. Now do you know the reason of this haste.
[Aside] I would I knew not why it should be slowed.—Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Happily met, my lady and my wife.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
That “may be” must be, love, on Thursday next.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What must be shall be.
That’s a certain text.
Come you to make confession to this Father?
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Do not deny to him that you love me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will confess to you that I love him.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
If I do so, it will be of more priceBeing spoke behind your back than to your face.
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
The tears have got small victory by that,For it was bad enough before their spite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth, And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.—Are you at leisure, holy Father, now,Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.—My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God shield I should disturb devotion!—Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye. [Kisses her] Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
O, shut the door! And when thou hast done so,Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief. It strains me past the compass of my wits. I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it, On Thursday next be married to this county.
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hear’st of this, Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it. If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help, Do thou but call my resolution wise, And with this knife I’ll help it presently. [Shows him a knife] God joined my heart and Romeo’s, thou our hands. And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo sealed, Shall be the label to another deed, Or my true heart with treacherous revolt Turn to another, this shall slay them both. Therefore out of thy long-experienced time, Give me some present counsel, or, behold, ‘Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that Which the commission of thy years and art Could to no issue of true honor bring. Be not so long to speak. I long to die If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope, Which craves as desperate an execution As that is desperate which we would prevent. If, rather than to marry County Paris, Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, Then is it likely thou wilt undertake A thing like death to chide away this shame, That copest with death himself to ’scape from it. An if thou darest, I’ll give thee remedy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris, From off the battlements of yonder tower; Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears; Or shut me nightly in a charnel house, O’ercovered quite with dead men’s rattling bones, With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls; Or bid me go into a new-made grave And hide me with a dead man in his shroud— Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble— And I will do it without fear or doubt, To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Hold, then. Go home, be merry. Give consent To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow. Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone. Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. [Shows her a vial] Take thou this vial, being then in bed, And this distillèd liquor drink thou off, When presently through all thy veins shall run A cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse Shall keep his native progress, but surcease. No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest. The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade To wanny ashes, thy eyes’ windows fall Like death when he shuts up the day of life. Each part, deprived of supple government, Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death. And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death Thou shalt continue two and forty hours, And then awake as from a pleasant sleep. Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. Then, as the manner of our country is, In thy best robes uncovered on the bier Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie. In the meantime, against thou shalt awake, Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift, And hither shall he come, and he and I Will watch thy waking, and that very night Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua. And this shall free thee from this present shame, If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, Abate thy valor in the acting it.
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
[Gives her the vial] Hold. Get you gone. Be strong and prosperousIn this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speedTo Mantua with my letters to thy lord.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. Farewell, dear father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Gives paper to FIRST SERVINGMAN] So many guests inviteas here are writ.
[To SECOND SERVINGMAN] Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
You shall have none ill, sir, for I’ll try if they can lick their fingers.
How canst thou try them so?
Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, be gone.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Ay, forsooth.
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Where I have learned me to repent the sin Of disobedient opposition To you and your behests, and am enjoined By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here To beg your pardon. [Falls to her knees] Pardon, I beseech you! Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Send for the county. Go tell him of this.I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence’ cell,And gave him what becomèd love I might, Not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty.
Why, I am glad on ’t. This is well. Stand up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is as ’t should be.—Let me see the county. Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.— Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar! Our whole city is much bound to him.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closetTo help me sort such needful ornamentsAs you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Go, Nurse. Go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.
We shall be short in our provision.‘Tis now near night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush, I will stir about, And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife. Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her. I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone. I'll play the housewife for this once.
What, ho! They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself To County Paris to prepare up him Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light, Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse, I pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, For I have need of many orisons To move the heavens to smile upon my state, Which, well thou know’st, is cross and full of sin.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
No, madam. We have culled such necessaries As are behooveful for our state tomorrow. So please you, let me now be left alone, And let the Nurse this night sit up with you. For, I am sure, you have your hands full all In this so sudden business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good night.Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again. I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins That almost freezes up the heat of life. I'll call them back again to comfort me. Nurse!—What should she do here? My dismal scene I needs must act alone. Come, vial. [Holds out the vial] What if this mixture do not work at all? Shall I be married then tomorrow morning? No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there. [Lays down a knife] What if it be a poison which the friar Subtly hath ministered to have me dead, Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored Because he married me before to Romeo? I fear it is—and yet methinks it should not, For he hath still been tried a holy man. How if, when I am laid into the tomb, I wake before the time that Romeo Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point. Shall I not then be stifled in the vault, To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes? Or, if I live, is it not very like The horrible conceit of death and night, Together with the terror of the place— As in a vault, an ancient receptacle Where for this many hundred years the bones Of all my buried ancestors are packed; Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth, Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say, At some hours in the night spirits resort— Alack, alack, is it not like that I, So early waking—what with loathsome smells, And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, That living mortals, hearing them, run mad— O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught, Environèd with all these hideous fears, And madly play with my forefathers' joints, And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud, And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains? O, look! Methinks I see my cousin's ghost Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay! Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to thee.
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, Nurse.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed. The curfew bell hath rung. ‘Tis three o’clock.— Look to the baked meats, good Angelica. Spare not for the cost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, you cot-quean, go.Get you to bed, faith. You’ll be sick tomorrowFor this night’s watching.
No, not a whit, what. I have watched ere now All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,But I will watch you from such watching now.
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Now, fellow,What is there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
Make haste, make haste, sirrah.
Fetch drier logs.Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs, And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha! Thou shalt be loggerhead. Good faith, 'tis day. The County will be here with music straight, For so he said he would.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hear him near.Nurse! Wife! What ho, what, Nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up. I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste, Make haste, the bridegroom he is come already. Make haste, I say.
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!—Fast, I warrant her, she.— Why, lamb! Why, lady! Fie, you slug-a-bed. Why, love, I say. Madam! Sweet-heart! Why, bride! What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now. Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant, The County Paris hath set up his rest That you shall rest but little.—God forgive me, Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep! I must needs wake her.—Madam, madam, madam! Ay, let the county take you in your bed. He’ll fright you up, i’ faith. Will it not be? [Opens the bed curtains] What, dressed and in your clothes, and down again? I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!— Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady’s dead!— Oh, welladay, that ever I was born!— Some aqua vitae, ho!—My lord! My lady!
What noise is here?
O lamentable day!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter?
Look, look. O heavy day!
O me, O me! My child, my only life,Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!—Help, help! Call help.
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.
She’s dead, deceased, she’s dead. Alack the day!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack the day. She’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!
Ha? Let me see her. Out, alas! She’s cold. Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff. Life and these lips have long been separated. Death lies on her like an untimely frost Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
O lamentable day!
O woeful time.
Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Ready to go, but never to return. O son! The night before thy wedding day Hath death lain with thy wife. There she lies, Flower as she was, deflowered by him. Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir. My daughter he hath wedded. I will die, And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death’s.
Have I thought long to see this morning’s face,And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! Most miserable hour that e’er time saw In lasting labor of his pilgrimage. But one, poor one, one poor and loving child, But one thing to rejoice and solace in, And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day! Most lamentable day, most woeful day That ever, ever, I did yet behold! O day, O day, O day, O hateful day! Never was seen so black a day as this. O woeful day, O woeful day!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain! Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled, By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown! O love! O life! Not life, but love in death.
Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed! Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now To murder, murder our solemnity? O child, O child! My soul, and not my child! Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead, And with my child my joys are buried.
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion’s cure lives not In these confusions. Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all, And all the better is it for the maid. Your part in her you could not keep from death, But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. The most you sought was her promotion, For ’twas your heaven she should be advanced. And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? Oh, in this love, you love your child so ill That you run mad, seeing that she is well. She’s not well married that lives married long, But she’s best married that dies married young. Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary On this fair corse, and, as the custom is, And in her best array, bear her to church. For though some nature bids us all lament, Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.
All things that we ordained festival Turn from their office to black funeral. Our instruments to melancholy bells, Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast. Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change, Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse, And all things change them to the contrary.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him; And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare To follow this fair corse unto her grave. The heavens do lour upon you for some ill. Move them no more by crossing their high will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Musicians, O musicians, “Heart’s Ease,” “Heart’s Ease.”O, an you will have me live, play “Heart’s Ease.”
Why “Heart’s ease?”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O musicians, because my heart itself plays “My Heart isFull.” O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
Not a dump, we. ‘Tis no time to play now.
You will not then?
No.
I will then give it you soundly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What will you give us?
No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.
Then I will give you the serving creature.
Then will I lay the serving creature’s dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa you. Do you note me?
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you withan iron wit and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men. [Sings] When griping grief the heart doth wound And doleful dumps the mind oppress, Then music with her silver sound— [Speaks] Why “silver sound”? Why “music with her silversound”? What say you, Simon Catling?
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Pretty.—What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
I say, “silver sound” because musicians sound for silver.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pretty too.—What say you, James Soundpost?
Faith, I know not what to say.
Oh, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is “music with her silver sound” because musicians have no gold for sounding. [Sings] Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress.
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Hang him, jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep, My dreams presage some joyful news at hand. My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne, And all this day an unaccustomed spirit Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. I dreamt my lady came and found me dead— Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think— And breathed such life with kisses in my lips That I revived and was an emperor. Ah me! How sweet is love itself possessed When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!—How now, Balthasar? Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? How fares my Juliet? That I ask again, For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill. Her body sleeps in Capels’ monument, And her immortal part with angels lives. I saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault And presently took post to tell it you. O, pardon me for bringing these ill news, Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Is it e’en so? Then I defy you, stars! Thou know’st my lodging. Get me ink and paper,And hire post horses. I will hence tonight.
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.Your looks are pale and wild, and do importSome misadventure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush, thou art deceived.Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
No, my good lord.
No matter. Get thee gone, And hire those horses. I’ll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight. Let’s see for means. O mischief, thou art swift To enter in the thoughts of desperate men! I do remember an apothecary— And hereabouts he dwells—which late I noted In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows, Culling of simples. Meager were his looks, Sharp misery had worn him to the bones, And in his needy shop a tortoise hung, An alligator stuffed, and other skins Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves A beggarly account of empty boxes, Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds, Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses, Were thinly scattered to make up a show. Noting this penury, to myself I said, “An if a man did need a poison now”— Whose sale is present death in Mantua— “Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.” Oh, this same thought did but forerun my need, And this same needy man must sell it me. As I remember, this should be the house. Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut. What, ho! Apothecary!
Who calls so loud?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor. Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear As will disperse itself through all the veins That the life-weary taker may fall dead, And that the trunk may be discharged of breath As violently as hasty powder fired Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s lawIs death to any he that utters them.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness, And fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks. Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes. Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. The world is not thy friend nor the world’s law. The world affords no law to make thee rich. Then be not poor, but break it, and take this. [Holds out money]
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Gives ROMEO poison] Put this in any liquid thing youwillAnd drink it off; and, if you had the strengthOf twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
[Giving money] There is they gold—worse poison to men'ssouls, Doing more murder in this loathsome world, Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none. Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with meTo Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!
This same should be the voice of Friar John.Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Going to find a barefoot brother out, One of our order, to associate me, Here in this city visiting the sick, And finding him, the searchers of the town, Suspecting that we both were in a house ere the infectious pestilence did reign, Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
I could not send it—here it is again— [Gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter] Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,So fearful were they of infection.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, The letter was not nice but full of charge, Of dear import, and the neglecting it May do much danger. Friar John, go hence. Get me an iron crow and bring it straight Unto my cell.
Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now must I to the monument alone. Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake. She will beshrew me much that Romeo Hath had no notice of these accidents. But I will write again to Mantua, And keep her at my cell till Romeo come. Poor living corpse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yon yew trees lay thee all along, Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground— So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me, As signal that thou hear’st something approach. Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
[Aside] I am almost afraid to stand aloneHere in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
[Scatters flowers around JULIET’S closed tomb] Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew— O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones— Which with sweet water nightly I will dew. Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans, The obsequies that I for thee will keep Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The boy gives warning something doth approach.What cursèd foot wanders this way tonightTo cross my obsequies and true love’s rite?
What with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. [Takes them from BALTHASAR] Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning See thou deliver it to my lord and father. [Gives letter to BALTHASAR] Give me the light. [Takes torch from BALTHASAR] Upon thy life I charge thee, Whate’er thou hear’st or seest, stand all aloof, And do not interrupt me in my course. Why I descend into this bed of death Is partly to behold my lady’s face, But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger A precious ring, a ring that I must use In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone. But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry In what I farther shall intend to do, By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs. The time and my intents are savage, wild, More fierce and more inexorable far Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that. [He gives BALTHASAR money] Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout. His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open, And in despite I’ll cram thee with more food! [Begins to opens the tomb with his tools]
[Aside] This is that banished haughty Montague, That murdered my love’s cousin, with which grief, It is supposed the fair creature died. And here is come to do some villainous shame To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him. [To ROMEO] Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague! Can vengeance be pursued further than death? Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee. Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither. Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man. Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone. Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth, Put not another sin upon my head By urging me to fury. O, be gone! By heaven, I love thee better than myself, For I come hither armed against myself. Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say A madman’s mercy bid thee run away.
I do defy thy comminationAnd apprehend thee for a felon here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
[Falls] Oh, I am slain! If thou be merciful, Open the tomb. Lay me with Juliet.
In faith, I will.—Let me peruse this face. Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris. What said my man, when my betossèd soul Did not attend him as we rode? I think He told me Paris should have married Juliet. Said he not so? Or did I dream it so? Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, To think it was so? —O, give me thy hand, One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book. I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave. [ROMEO opens the tomb to reveal JULIET inside] A grave? Oh, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth, For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light. Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred. [Lays PARIS in the tomb] How oft when men are at the point of death Have they been merry, which their keepers call A lightning before death! Oh, how may I Call this a lightning?—O my love, my wife! Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath, Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. Thou art not conquered. Beauty’s ensign yet Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, And death’s pale flag is not advancèd there.— Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? O, what more favor can I do to thee, Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain To sunder his that was thine enemy? Forgive me, cousin. —Ah, dear Juliet, Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe That unsubstantial death is amorous, And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps Thee here in dark to be his paramour? For fear of that, I still will stay with thee, And never from this palace of dim night Depart again. Here, here will I remain With worms that are thy chamber maids. Oh, here Will I set up my everlasting rest, And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last. Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O you The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss A dateless bargain to engrossing death. [Kisses JULIET, takes out the poison] Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide. Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on The dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark. Here’s to my love! [Drinks the poison] O true apothecary, Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonightHave my old feet stumbled at graves!—Who’s there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend, What torch is yond that vainly lends his light To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern, It burneth in the Capels’ monument.
It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master,One that you love.
Who is it?
Romeo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long hath he been there?
Full half an hour.
Go with me to the vault.
I dare not, sir. My master knows not but I am gone hence, And fearfully did menace me with death If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay, then. I’ll go alone. Fear comes upon me.Oh, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As I did sleep under this yew tree here,I dreamt my master and another fought,And that my master slew him.
[Approaches the tomb] Romeo!— Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains The stony entrance of the sepulcher? What mean these masterless and gory swords To lie discolored by this place of peace? [Looks inside the tomb] Romeo! O, pale!—Who else? What, Paris too? And steeped in blood?—Ah, what an unkind hour Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs.
O comfortable Friar! Where is my lord? I do remember well where I should be, And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. A greater power than we can contradict Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away. Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, And Paris too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee Among a sisterhood of holy nuns. Stay not to question, for the watch is coming. Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.— What’s here? A cup, closed in my true love’s hand? Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.— O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop To help me after? I will kiss thy lips. Haply some poison yet doth hang on them, To make me die with a restorative. [Kisses ROMEO] Thy lips are warm.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To PAGE] Lead, boy. Which way?
Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief. O happy dagger,This is thy sheath. There rust and let me die. [Stabs herself with ROMEO’s dagger and dies]
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
The ground is bloody.—Search about the churchyard.Go, some of you. Whoe’er you find, attach.
Pitiful sight! Here lies the county slain, And Juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead, Who here hath lain these two days buried.— Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets. Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,But the true ground of all these piteous woesWe cannot without circumstance descry.
Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps.We took this mattock and this spade from him As he was coming from this churchyard’s side.
A great suspicion. Stay the friar too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What misadventure is so early upThat calls our person from our morning rest?
What should it be, that they shriek so abroad?
Oh, the people in the street cry “Romeo,”Some “Juliet,” and some “Paris,” and all runWith open outcry toward our monument.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain, And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,Warm and new killed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo’s man,With instruments upon them fit to open These dead men’s tombs.
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds! This dagger hath mista’en —for, lo, his house Is empty on the back of Montague, And it mis-sheathèd in my daughter’s bosom.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell,That warns my old age to a sepulcher.
Come, Montague, for thou art early upTo see thy son and heir now early down.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight. Grief of my son’s exile hath stopped her breath.What further woe conspires against mine age?
Look, and thou shalt see.
[To ROMEO] O thou untaught! What manners is in this,To press before thy father to a grave?
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, Till we can clear these ambiguities And know their spring, their head, their true descent, And then will I be general of your woes, And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear, And let mischance be slave to patience.— Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
I am the greatest, able to do least, Yet most suspected, as the time and place Doth make against me, of this direful murder. And here I stand, both to impeach and purge, Myself condemnèd and myself excused.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath Is not so long as is a tedious tale. Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet, And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife. I married them, and their stol’n marriage day Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death Banished the new-made bridegroom from the city— For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined. You, to remove that siege of grief from her, Betrothed and would have married her perforce To County Paris. Then comes she to me, And with wild looks bid me devise some mean To rid her from this second marriage, Or in my cell there would she kill herself. Then gave I her, so tutored by my art, A sleeping potion, which so took effect As I intended, for it wrought on her The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo, That he should hither come as this dire night, To help to take her from her borrowed grave, Being the time the potion’s force should cease. But he which bore my letter, Friar John, Was stayed by accident, and yesternight Returned my letter back. Then all alone At the prefixèd hour of her waking Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault, Meaning to keep her closely at my cell Till I conveniently could send to Romeo, But when I came, some minute ere the time Of her awakening, here untimely lay The noble Paris and true Romeo dead. She wakes, and I entreated her come forth, And bear this work of heaven with patience. But then a noise did scare me from the tomb, And she, too desperate, would not go with me, But, as it seems, did violence on herself. All this I know, and to the marriage Her Nurse is privy. And if aught in this Miscarried by my fault, let my old life Be sacrificed some hour before his time Unto the rigor of severest law.
We still have known thee for a holy man.— Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say in this?
I brought my master news of Juliet’s death, And then in post he came from Mantua To this same place, to this same monument. [Shows a letter] This letter he early bid me give his father, And threatened me with death, going in the vault, If I departed not and left him there.
Give me the letter. I will look on it. [Takes letter from BALTHASAR] Where is the county’s page, that raised the watch?—Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave, And bid me stand aloof, and so I did. Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb, And by and by my master drew on him, And then I ran away to call the watch.
[Skims the letter] This letter doth make good the friar’s words, Their course of love, the tidings of her death. And here he writes that he did buy a poison Of a poor ‘pothecary, and therewithal Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet. Where be these enemies?—Capulet! Montague! See what a scourge is laid upon your hate, That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! And I, for winking at your discords, too Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.This is my daughter’s jointure, for no moreCan I demand.
But I can give thee more, For I will raise her statue in pure gold, That whiles Verona by that name is known, There shall no figure at such rate be set As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A glooming peace this morning with it brings. The sun for sorrow will not show his head. Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things; Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd; For never was a story of more woe Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
TO. THE. ONLY. BEGETTER. OF. THESE. ENSUING. SONNETS. Mr. W.H. ALL HAPPINESS. AND. THAT. ETERNITY. PROMISED. BY. OUR. EVER-LASTING. POET. WISHETH. THE. WELL-WISHING. ADVENTURER. IN. SETTING. FORTH. T.T.
From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty’s rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease His tender heir might bear his memory. But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies, Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Thou that art now the world’s fresh ornament And only herald to the gaudy spring, Within thine own bud buriest thy content, And, tender churl, mak’st waste in niggarding. Pity the world, or else this glutton be, To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field, Thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now, Will be a tattered weed, of small worth held. Then being asked where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days, To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise. How much more praise deserved thy beauty’s use If thou couldst answer, “This fair child of mine Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,” Proving his beauty by succession thine. This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest, Now is the time that face should form another, Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. For where is she so fair whose uneared womb Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? Or who is he so fond will be the tomb Of his self-love, to stop posterity? Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee Calls back the lovely April of her prime; So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time. But if thou live remembered not to be, Die single and thine image dies with thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend Upon thyself thy beauty’s legacy? Nature’s bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, And, being frank, she lends to those are free. Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse The bounteous largess given thee to give? Profitless usurer, why dost thou use So great a sum of sums yet canst not live? For having traffic with thyself alone, Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive. Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, What acceptable audit canst thou leave? Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, Which usèd lives th' executor to be.
Those hours that with gentle work did frame The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell Will play the tyrants to the very same And that unfair which fairly doth excel. For never-resting time leads summer on To hideous winter and confounds him there, Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone, Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness everywhere. Then were not summer’s distillation left, A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, Beauty’s effect with beauty were bereft, Nor it nor no remembrance what it was. But flowers distilled, though they with winter meet, Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Then let not winter’s ragged hand deface In thee thy summer, ere thou be distilled. Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place With beauty’s treasure, ere it be self-killed. That use is not forbidden usury Which happies those that pay the willing loan; That’s for thyself to breed another thee, Or ten times happier, be it ten for one. Ten times thyself were happier than thou art, If ten of thine ten times refigured thee. Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart, Leaving thee living in posterity? Be not self-willed, for thou art much too fair To be death’s conquest and make worms thine heir.
Lo, in the Orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty; And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage. But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, Like feeble age he reeleth from the day, The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are From his low tract and look another way. So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon, Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.
Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly? Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy. Why lov’st thou that which thou receiv’st not gladly, Or else receiv’st with pleasure thine annoy? If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, By unions married, do offend thine ear, They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering, Resembling sire and child and happy mother, Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing; Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one, Sings this to thee: “Thou single wilt prove none.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye That thou consum’st thyself in single life? Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die, The world will wail thee like a makeless wife; The world will be thy widow and still weep, That thou no form of thee hast left behind, When every private widow well may keep, By children’s eyes, her husband’s shape in mind. Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; But beauty’s waste hath in the world an end, And kept unused, the user so destroys it. No love toward others in that bosom sits That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
For shame deny that thou bear’st love to any, Who for thyself art so unprovident. Grant if thou wilt, thou art belov’d of many, But that thou none lov’st is most evident; For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate That ‘gainst thyself thou stick’st not to conspire, Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate Which to repair should be thy chief desire. O change thy thought, that I may change my mind. Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love? Be as thy presence is, gracious and kind, Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove. Make thee another self for love of me, That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow’st In one of thine, from that which thou departest; And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow’st Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest. Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase; Without this, folly, age, and cold decay. If all were minded so, the times should cease, And threescore year would make the world away. Let those whom nature hath not made for store, Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish. Look whom she best endowed, she gave the more, Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish. She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
When I do count the clock that tells the time, And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; When I behold the violet past prime, And sable curls all silvered o'er with white; When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard; Then of thy beauty do I question make, That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow, And nothing 'gainst Time’s scythe can make defense Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence.
O that you were yourself! But, love, you are No longer yours than you yourself here live. Against this coming end you should prepare, And your sweet semblance to some other give. So should that beauty which you hold in lease Find no determination; then you were Yourself again after yourself’s decease, When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. Who lets so fair a house fall to decay, Which husbandry in honor might uphold Against the stormy gusts of winter’s day And barren rage of death’s eternal cold? O, none but unthrifts, dear my love you know, You had a father; let your son say so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck, And yet methinks I have astronomy, But not to tell of good or evil luck, Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well, By oft predict that I in heaven find; But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And, constant stars, in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive, If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert; Or else of thee this I prognosticate: Thy end is truth’s and beauty’s doom and date.
When I consider every thing that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment; That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence commént; When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheerèd and checked ev'n by the self-same sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, And wear their brave state out of memory; Then the conceit of this inconstant stay Sets you, most rich in youth, before my sight, Where wasteful time debateth with decay, To change your day of youth to sullied night; And all in war with time for love of you, As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
But wherefore do not you a mightier way Make war upon this bloody tyrant, time, And fortify yourself in your decay With means more blessèd than my barren rhyme? Now stand you on the top of happy hours, And many maiden gardens, yet unset, With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers, Much liker than your painted counterfeit. So should the lines of life that life repair Which this time’s pencil or my pupil pen Neither in inward worth nor outward fair Can make you live yourself in eyes of men. To give away yourself keeps yourself still, And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
Who will believe my verse in time to come If it were filled with your most high deserts? Though yet heav'n knows it is but as a tomb Which hides your life and shows not half your parts. If I could write the beauty of your eyes And in fresh numbers number all your graces, The age to come would say, “This poet lies— Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces.” So should my papers, yellowed with their age, Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue, And your true rights be termed a poet’s rage And stretchèd meter of an ántique song; But were some child of yours alive that time, You should live twice: in it and in my rhyme.
Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate. Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer’s lease hath all too short a date. Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimmed; And every fair from fair sometime declines, By chance or nature’s changing course untrimmed. But thy eternal summer shall not fade, Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st, Nor shall death brag thou wand’rest in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st. So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion’s paws, And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger’s jaws, And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood; Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet’st, And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed time, To the wide world and all her fading sweets; But I forbid thee one most heinous crime: O carve not with thy hours my love’s fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine ántique pen. Him in thy course untainted do allow For beauty’s pattern to succeeding men. Yet do thy worst, old Time; despite thy wrong, My love shall in my verse ever live young.
A woman’s face, with nature’s own hand painted, Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted With shifting change, as is false women’s fashion; An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; A man in hue, all hues in his controlling, Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created, Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated, By adding one thing to my purpose nothing. But since she pricked thee out for women’s pleasure, Mine be thy love, and thy love’s use their treasure.
So is it not with me as with that muse, Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse, Who heav'n itself for ornament doth use, And every fair with his fair doth rehearse— Making a couplement of proud compare With sun and moon, with earth and sea’s rich gems, With April’s first-born flow'rs, and all things rare That heaven’s air in this huge rondure hems. O let me, true in love but truly write, And then believe me: my love is as fair As any mother’s child, though not so bright As those gold candles fixed in heaven’s air. Let them say more that like of hearsay well; I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
My glass shall not persuade me I am old So long as youth and thou are of one date; But when in thee time’s furrows I behold, Then look I death my days should expiate. For all that beauty that doth cover thee Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me. How can I then be elder than thou art? O therefore, love, be of thyself so wary As I, not for myself, but for thee will, Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary As tender nurse her babe from faring ill. Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain; Thou gav’st me thine not to give back again.
As an unperfect actor on the stage, Who with his fear is put besides his part, Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, Whose strength’s abundance weakens his own heart; So I, for fear of trust, forget to say The perfect ceremony of love’s rite, And in mine own love’s strength seem to decay, O'ercharged with burden of mine own love’s might. O let my books be then the eloquence And dumb presagers of my speaking breast, Who plead for love and look for recompense More than that tongue that more hath more expressed. O learn to read what silent love hath writ! To hear with eyes belongs to love’s fine wit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mine eye hath played the painter and hath steeled Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart. My body is the frame wherein ’tis held, And pérspective it is best painter’s art. For through the painter must you see his skill To find where your true image pictured lies, Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still, That hath his windows glazèd with thine eyes. Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, wherethrough the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee. Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art; They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
Let those who are in favor with their stars Of public honor and proud titles boast, Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars, Unlooked for joy in that I honor most. Great princes' favorites their fair leaves spread But as the marigold at the sun’s eye, And in themselves their pride lies burièd, For at a frown they in their glory die. The painful warrior famousèd for worth, After a thousand victories once foiled, Is from the book of honor razèd quite, And all the rest forgot for which he toiled. Then happy I that love and am belovèd Where I may not remove nor be removèd.
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, To thee I send this written embassage, To witness duty, not to show my wit. Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, But that I hope some good conceit of thine In thy soul’s thought, all naked, will bestow it. Till whatsoever star that guides my moving Points on me graciously with fair aspéct And puts apparel on my tattered loving, To show me worthy of thy sweet respect. Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee; Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, The dear repose for limbs with travail tired; But then begins a journey in my head To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired. For then my thoughts, from far where I abide, Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, Looking on darkness which the blind do see. Save that my soul’s imaginary sight Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night, Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new. Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind, For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
How can I then return in happy plight That am debarred the benefit of rest? When day’s oppression is not eased by night, But day by night and night by day oppressed? And each, though enemies to either’s reign, Do in consent shake hands to torture me, The one by toil, the other to complain How far I toil, still farther off from thee. I tell the day to please him thou art bright, And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven. So flatter I the swart-complexioned night, When sparkling stars twire not, thou gild’st the even. But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, And night doth nightly make grief’s length seem stronger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes I all alone beweep my outcast state, And trouble deaf heav'n with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featured like him, like him with friends possessed, Desiring this man’s art, and that man’s scope, With what I most enjoy contented least; Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, Haply I think on thee, and then my state, Like to the lark at break of day arising From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate. For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past, I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste. Then can I drown an eye unused to flow, For precious friends hid in death’s dateless night, And weep afresh love’s long since cancelled woe, And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight. Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er The sad account of fore-bemoanèd moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before. But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restored, and sorrows end.
Thy bosom is endearèd with all hearts Which I, by lacking, have supposèd dead; And there reigns love, and all love’s loving parts, And all those friends which I thought burièd. How many a holy and obsequious tear Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye As interest of the dead, which now appear But things removed that hidden in thee lie. Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, Who all their parts of me to thee did give; That due of many now is thine alone. Their images I loved I view in thee, And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.
If thou survive my well-contented day, When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover, And shalt by fortune once more re-survey These poor rude lines of thy deceasèd lover, Compare them with the bett'ring of the time, And though they be outstripped by every pen, Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, Exceeded by the height of happier men. O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: “Had my friend’s muse grown with this growing age, A dearer birth than this his love had brought To march in ranks of better equipage. But since he died and poets better prove, Theirs for their style I’ll read, his for his love.”
Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy, Anon permit the basest clouds to ride With ugly rack on his celestial face, And from the fórlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace. Ev'n so my sun one early morn did shine With all triumphant splendor on my brow; But out alack, he was but one hour mine; The region cloud hath masked him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth. Suns of the world may stain when heav‘n’s sun staineth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day And make me travel forth without my cloak, To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke? 'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face. For no man well of such a salve can speak That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace. Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss. The offender’s sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offense’s cross. Ah, but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done. Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud; Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. All men make faults, and even I in this, Authórizing thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, Excusing their sins more than their sins are. For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense— Thy adverse party is thy advocate— And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence. Such civil war is in my love and hate That I an áccessory needs must be To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
Let me confess that we two must be twain, Although our undivided loves are one. So shall those blots that do with me remain Without thy help by me be borne alone. In our two loves there is but one respect, Though in our lives a separable spite, Which, though it alter not love’s sole effect, Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love’s delight. I may not evermore acknowledge thee, Lest my bewailèd guilt should do thee shame; Nor thou with public kindness honor me, Unless thou take that honor from thy name. But do not so; I love thee in such sort, As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As a decrepit father takes delight To see his active child do deeds of youth, So I, made lame by fortune’s dearest spite, Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth. For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, Or any of these all, or all, or more, Entitled in thy parts do crownèd sit, I make my love engrafted to this store. So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised, Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give That I in thy abundance am sufficed, And by a part of all thy glory live. Look what is best, that best I wish in thee. This wish I have; then ten times happy me.
How can my muse want subject to invent While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent For every vulgar paper to rehearse? O give thyself the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight. For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee, When thou thyself dost give invention light? Be thou the tenth muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outlive long date. If my slight muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O how thy worth with manners may I sing, When thou art all the better part of me? What can mine own praise to mine own self bring, And what is’t but mine own when I praise thee? Even for this, let us divided live, And our dear love lose name of single one, That by this separation I may give That due to thee which thou deserv’st alone. O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove, Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave To entertain the time with thoughts of love, Which time and thoughts so sweetly dost deceive, And that thou teachest how to make one twain, By praising him here who doth hence remain.
Take all my loves, my love; yea, take them all. What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call. All mine was thine before thou hadst this more. Then if for my love thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest. But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. I do forgive thy robb'ry, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty; And yet love knows it is a greater grief To bear love’s wrong than hate’s known injury. Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits When I am sometime absent from thy heart, Thy beauty and thy years full well befits, For still temptation follows where thou art. Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won; Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed; And when a woman woos, what woman’s son Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed? Ay me, but yet thou might’st my seat forbear, And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, Who lead thee in their riot even there Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth: Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
That thou hast her it is not all my grief, And yet it may be said I loved her dearly; That she hath thee is of my wailing chief, A loss in love that touches me more nearly. Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye: Thou dost love her because thou knowst I love her; And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her. If I lose thee, my loss is my love’s gain, And losing her, my friend hath found that loss; Both find each other, and I lose both twain, And both for my sake lay on me this cross. But here’s the joy; my friend and I are one; Sweet flatt'ry! Then she loves but me alone.
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, For all the day they view things unrespected; But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, And, darkly bright, are bright in dark directed. Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright— How would thy shadow’s form form happy show To the clear day with thy much clearer light, When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so? How would, I say, mine eyes be blessèd made By looking on thee in the living day, When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay? All days are nights to see till I see thee,And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance should not stop my way; For then, despite of space, I would be brought From limits far remote where thou dost stay. No matter then although my foot did stand Upon the farthest earth removed from thee, For nimble thought can jump both sea and land As soon as think the place where he would be. But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, But that so much of earth and water wrought, I must attend time’s leisure with my moan, Receiving naughts by elements so slow But heavy tears, badges of either’s woe.
The other two, slight air and purging fire, Are both with thee, wherever I abide; The first my thought, the other my desire, These present absent with swift motion slide. For when these quicker elements are gone In tender embassy of love to thee, My life, being made of four, with two alone Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy; Until life’s composition be recured By those swift messengers returned from thee, Who ev'n but now come back again, assured Of thy fair health, recounting it to me. This told, I joy, but then no longer glad, I send them back again and straight grow sad.
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war How to divide the conquest of thy sight; Mine eye my heart thy picture’s sight would bar; My heart mine eye the freedom of that right. My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie, A closet never pierced with crystal eyes; But the defendant doth that plea deny, And says in him thy fair appearance lies. To 'cide this title is empanellèd A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart, And by their verdict is determinèd The clear eye’s moiety and the dear heart’s part: As thus—mine eye’s due is thy outward part, And my heart’s right, thy inward love of heart.
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, And each doth good turns now unto the other. When that mine eye is famished for a look, Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, With my love’s picture then my eye doth feast And to the painted banquet bids my heart. Another time mine eye is my heart’s guest, And in his thoughts of love doth share a part. So either by thy picture or my love, Thyself away are present still with me; For thou no farther than my thoughts canst move, And I am still with them, and they with thee; Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight Awakes my heart to heart’s and eye’s delight.
How careful was I, when I took my way, Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, That to my use it might unusèd stay From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust. But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are, Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, Thou best of dearest, and mine only care, Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. Thee have I not locked up in any chest, Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, Within the gentle closure of my breast, From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear, For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Against that time (if ever that time come) When I shall see thee frown on my defects; Whenas thy love hath cast his utmost sum, Called to that audit by advised respects; Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye; When love, converted from the thing it was, Shall reasons find of settled gravity; Against that time do I ensconce me here Within the knowledge of mine own desert, And this my hand against myself uprear To guard the lawful reasons on thy part: To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws, Since why to love I can allege no cause.
How heavy do I journey on the way When what I seek (my weary travel’s end) Doth teach that ease and that repose to say, “Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.” The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, Plods dully on to bear that weight in me, As if by some instinct the wretch did know His rider loved not speed, being made from thee. The bloody spur cannot provoke him on That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, Which heavily he answers with a groan, More sharp to me than spurring to his side; For that same groan doth put this in my mind: My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
Thus can my love excuse the slow offense Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed: From where thou art, why should I haste me thence? Till I return, of posting is no need. O what excuse will my poor beast then find, When swift extremity can seem but slow? Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind; In wingèd speed no motion shall I know: Then can no horse with my desire keep pace; Therefore desire, of perfect’st love being made, Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race, But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade: Since from thee going he went wilful slow, Towards thee I’ll run, and give him leave to go.
So am I as the rich whose blessèd key Can bring him to his sweet up-lockèd treasure, The which he will not every hour survey, For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure . Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, Since seldom coming in the long year set, Like stones of worth they thinly placèd are, Or captain jewels in the carcanet. So is the time that keeps you as my chest, Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, To make some special instant special blest By new unfolding his imprisoned pride. Blessèd are you whose worthiness gives scope, Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend? Since everyone hath every one, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend. Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you. On Helen’s cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new. Speak of the spring and foison of the year; The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear, And you in every blessèd shape we know. In all external grace you have some part, But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give! The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odor which doth in it live. The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye As the perfumèd tincture of the roses, Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly, When summer’s breath their maskèd buds discloses; But for their virtue only is their show, They live unwooed, and unrespected fade, Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so; Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odors made; And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth; When that shall vade, my verse distills your truth.
Not marble nor the gilded monuments Of princes shall outlive this pow'rful rhyme, But you shall shine more bright in these conténts Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time. When wasteful war shall statues overturn, And broils root out the work of masonry, Nor Mars his sword, nor war’s quick fire, shall burn The living record of your memory. 'Gainst death and all oblivious enmity Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room Even in the eyes of all posterity That wear this world out to the ending doom. So till the judgment that yourself arise,You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, Which but today by feeding is allayed, Tomorrow sharpened in his former might. So love be thou; although today thou fill Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness, Tomorrow see again, and do not kill The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness. Let this sad int'rim like the ocean be Which parts the shore, where two contracted new Come daily to the banks, that when they see Return of love, more blest may be the view; Else call it winter, which being full of care, Makes summer’s welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
Being your slave, what should I do but tend Upon the hours and times of your desire? I have no precious time at all to spend, Nor services to do, till you require. Nor dare I chide the world without end hour Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour When you have bid your servant once adieu. Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought Save, where you are, how happy you make those. So true a fool is love that in your will, Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
That god forbid, that made me first your slave, I should in thought control your times of pleasure, Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave, Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure. O let me suffer, being at your beck, Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty; And patience tame to sufferance bide each check, Without accusing you of injury. Be where you list, your charter is so strong That you yourself may privilege your time To what you will; to you it doth belong Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime. I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If there be nothing new, but that which is Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled, Which, lab'ring for invention, bear amiss The second burthen of a former child! O that recórd could with a backward look, Ev'n of five hundred courses of the sun, Show me your image in some ántique book, Since mind at first in character was done, That I might see what the old world could say To this composèd wonder of your frame; Whether we are mended, or where better they, Or whether revolution be the same. O sure I am the wits of former days To subjects worse have giv'n admiring praise.
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end, Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend. Nativity, once in the main of light, Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned, Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, And time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth And delves the parallels in beauty’s brow; Feeds on the rarities of nature’s truth, And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow. And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
Is it thy will thy image should keep open My heavy eyelids to the weary night? Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, While shadows like to thee do mock my sight? Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee So far from home into my deeds to pry, To find out shames and idle hours in me, The scope and tenor of thy jealousy? O no; thy love, though much, is not so great. It is my love that keeps mine eye awake, Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, To play the watchman ever for thy sake. For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, From me far off, with others all too near.
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye And all my soul, and all my every part; And for this sin there is no remedy, It is so grounded inward in my heart. Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, No shape so true, no truth of such account; And for myself mine own worth do define, As I all other in all worths surmount. But when my glass shows me myself indeed, Beated and chopped with tanned antiquity, Mine own self-love quite contrary I read; Self so self-loving were iniquity. 'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise, Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
Against my love shall be as I am now, With time’s injurious hand crushed and o'erworn; When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn Hath traveled on to age’s steepy night, And all those beauties whereof now he’s king Are vanishing or vanished out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring; For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age’s cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory My sweet love’s beauty, though my lover’s life. His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I have seen by time’s fell hand defaced The rich proud cost of outworn buried age; When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed, And brass eternal slave to mortal rage; When I have seen the hungry ocean gain Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, And the firm soil win of the watery main, Increasing store with loss, and loss with store; When I have seen such interchange of state, Or state itself confounded to decay, Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate, That time will come and take my love away. This thought is as a death, which cannot choose But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, But sad mortality o'ersways their power, How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O how shall summer’s honey breath hold out Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays? O fearful meditation! Where, alack,Shall time’s best jewel from time’s chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil or beauty can forbid? O none, unless this miracle have might, That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry, As to behold desert a beggar born, And needy nothing trimmed in jollity, And purest faith unhappily forsworn, And gilded honor shamefully misplaced, And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, And right perfection wrongfully disgraced, And strength by limping sway disablèd, And art made tongue-tied by authority, And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill, And simple truth miscalled simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill. Tired with all these, from these would I be gone, Save that to die, I leave my love alone.
Ah, wherefore with infection should he live, And with his presence grace impiety, That sin by him advantage should achieve And lace itself with his society? Why should false painting imitate his cheek, And steal dead seeing of his living hue? Why should poor beauty indirectly seek Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is, Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins? For she hath no exchequer now but his, And, proud of many, lives upon his gains. O him she stores, to show what wealth she had In days long since, before these last so bad.
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, When beauty lived and died as flow'rs do now, Before these bastard signs of fair were born, Or durst inhabit on a living brow; Before the golden tresses of the dead, The right of sepulchers, were shorn away, To live a second life on second head; Ere beauty’s dead fleece made another gay. In him those holy ántique hours are seen, Without all ornament, itself and true, Making no summer of another’s green, Robbing no old to dress his beauty new; And him as for a map doth nature store, To show false art what beauty was of yore.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Those parts of thee that the world’s eye doth view Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend. All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due, Utt'ring bare truth, ev'n so as foes commend. Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned; But those same tongues that give thee so thine own In other accents do this praise confound By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. They look into the beauty of thy mind, And that in guess they measure by thy deeds; Then, churls, their thoughts (although their eyes were kind) To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds; But why thy odor matcheth not thy show, The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, For slander’s mark was ever yet the fair; The ornament of beauty is suspéct, A crow that flies in heaven’s sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve Thy worth the greater, being wooed of time; For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, And thou present’st a pure unstainèd prime. Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days, Either not assailed, or victor being charged; Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy evermore enlarged. If some suspéct of ill masked not thy show, Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
No longer mourn for me when I am dead Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell Give warning to the world that I am fled From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell: Nay, if you read this line, remember not The hand that writ it, for I love you so That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, If thinking on me then should make you woe. O if, I say, you look upon this verse When I perhaps compounded am with clay, Do not so much as my poor name rehearse, But let your love even with my life decay, Lest the wise world should look into your moan And mock you with me after I am gone.
O lest the world should task you to recite What merit lived in me that you should love After my death, dear love, forget me quite, For you in me can nothing worthy prove; Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, To do more for me than mine own desert, And hang more praise upon deceasèd I Than niggard truth would willingly impart. O lest your true love may seem false in this, That you for love speak well of me untrue, My name be buried where my body is, And live no more to shame nor me nor you. For I am shamed by that which I bring forth, And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
That time of year thou mayst in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou seest the twilight of such day As after sunset fadeth in the west, Which by and by black night doth take away, Death’s second self, that seals up all in rest. In me thou seest the glowing of such fire That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, As the deathbed whereon it must expire Consumed with that which it was nourished by. This thou perceiv’st, which makes thy love more strong, To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But be contented when that fell arrest Without all bail shall carry me away; My life hath in this line some interest, Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. When thou reviewest this, thou dost review The very part was consecrate to thee. The earth can have but earth, which is his due; My spirit is thine, the better part of me. So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, The prey of worms, my body being dead, The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife, Too base of thee to be rememb’red. The worth of that is that which it contains, And that is this, and this with thee remains.
So are you to my thoughts as food to life, Or as sweet seasoned show'rs are to the ground; And for the peace of you I hold such strife As ’twixt a miser and his wealth is found; Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure; Now counting best to be with you alone, Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure; Sometime all full with feasting on your sight And by and by clean starvèd for a look; Possessing or pursuing no delight, Save what is had or must from you be took. Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
Why is my verse so barren of new pride, So far from variation or quick change? Why with the time do I not glance aside To new-found methods and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same, And keep invention in a noted weed, That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth, and where they did proceed? O know, sweet love, I always write of you, And you and love are still my argument. So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent: For as the sun is daily new and old, So is my love still telling what is told.
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste; The vacant leaves thy mind’s impr'nt will bear, And of this book this learning mayst thou taste: The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show Of mouthèd graves will give thee memory; Thou by thy dial’s shady stealth mayst know Time’s thievish progress to eternity. Look what thy memory cannot contain, Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain, To take a new acquaintance of thy mind. These offices, so oft as thou wilt look, Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
So oft have I invoked thee for my muse, And found such fair assistance in my verse, As every alien pen hath got my use, And under thee their poesy disperse. Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing, And heavy ignorance aloft to fly, Have added feathers to the learnèd’s wing And given grace a double majesty. Yet be most proud of that which I compile, Whose influence is thine and born of thee. In others' works thou dost but mend the style, And arts with thy sweet graces gracèd be; But thou art all my art, and dost advance As high as learning my rude ignorance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid, My verse alone had all thy gentle grace, But now my gracious numbers are decayed, And my sick muse doth give another place. I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument Deserves the travail of a worthier pen, Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent He robs thee of and pays it thee again. He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word From thy behavior; beauty doth he give And found it in thy cheek; he can afford No praise to thee but what in thee doth live. Then thank him not for that which he doth say, Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.
O how I faint when I of you do write, Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, And in the praise thereof spends all his might, To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame. But since your worth, wide as the ocean is, The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, My saucy bark, inferior far to his, On your broad main doth willfully appear. Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; Or, being wracked, I am a worthless boat, He of tall building and of goodly pride. Then, if he thrive and I be cast away, The worst was this: my love was my decay.
Or I shall live, your epitaph to make, Or you survive, when I in earth am rotten, From hence your memory death cannot take, Although in me each part will be forgotten. Your name from hence immortal life shall have, Though I, once gone, to all the world must die. The earth can yield me but a common grave, When you entombèd in men’s eyes shall lie. Your monument shall be my gentle verse, Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read, And tongues to be your being shall rehearse When all the breathers of this world are dead. You still shall live—such virtue hath my pen— Where breath most breathes, ev'n in the mouths of men.
I grant thou wert not married to my muse, And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook The dedicated words which writers use Of their fair subject, blessing every book. Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, Finding thy worth a limit past my praise, And therefore art enforced to seek anew Some fresher stamp of the time-bett'ring days. And do so, love; yet when they have devised What strainèd touches rhetoric can lend, Thou, truly fair, wert truly sympathized In true plain words by thy true-telling friend. And their gross painting might be better used Where cheeks need blood—in thee it is abused.
I never saw that you did painting need, And therefore to your fair no painting set. I found, or thought I found, you did exceed The barren tender of a poet’s debt. And therefore have I slept in your report, That you yourself, being extant, well might show How far a modern quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. This silence for my sin you did impute, Which shall be most my glory, being dumb. For I impair not beauty, being mute, When others would give life, and bring a tomb. There lives more life in one of your fair eyes Than both your poets can in praise devise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is it that says most, which can say more Than this rich praise, that you alone are you— In whose conf'ne immurèd is the store Which should example where your equal grew? Lean penury within that pen doth dwell That to his subject lends not some small glory. But he that writes of you, if he can tell That you are you, so dignifies his story. Let him but copy what in you is writ, Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admired everywhere. You to your beauteous blessings add a curse, Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still, While comments of your praise, richly compiled, Reserve their character with golden quill And precious phrase by all the muses filed. I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words, And like unlettered clerk still cry “Amen” To every hymn that able spirit affords, In polished form of well-refinèd pen. Hearing you praised, I say “'Tis so, ’tis true,” And to the most of praise add something more; But that is in my thought, whose love to you, Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. Then others for the breath of words respect, Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, Bound for the prize of all too precious you, That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? No, neither he, nor his compeers by night Giving him aid, my verse astonishèd. He, nor that affable familiar ghost Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, As victors of my silence cannot boast. I was not sick of any fear from thence; But when your countenance filled up his line, Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.
Farewell, thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know’st thy estimate. The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate. For how do I hold thee but by thy granting, And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving. Thyself thou gav’st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gav’st it, else mistaking; So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgment making. Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter: In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light And place my merit in the eye of scorn, Upon thy side against myself I’ll fight, And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. With mine own weakness being best acquainted, Upon thy part I can set down a story Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted, That thou in losing me shalt win much glory. And I by this will be a gainer too, For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, The injuries that to myself I do, Doing thee vantage, double vantage me. Such is my love, to thee I so belong, That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, And I will comment upon that offense. Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, Against thy reasons making no defense. Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill, To set a form upon desired change, As I’ll myself disgrace, knowing thy will; I will acquaintance strangle and look strange, Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue Thy sweet belovèd name no more shall dwell, Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong And haply of our old acquaintance tell. For thee against myself I’ll vow debate, For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now, Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross; Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after-loss: Ah, do not, when my heart hath ’scaped this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquered woe. Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purposed overthrow. If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite But in the onset come; so shall I taste At first the very worst of fortune’s might; And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, Some in their wealth, some in their body’s force, Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill, Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; And every humor hath his adjunct pleasure, Wherein it finds a joy above the rest. But these particulars are not my measure; All these I better in one general best. Thy love is better than high birth to me, Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost, Of more delight than hawks or horses be; And having thee, of all men’s pride I boast; Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take All this away, and me most wretched make.
But do thy worst to steal thyself away, For term of life thou art assurèd mine, And life no longer than thy love will stay, For it depends upon that love of thine. Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, When in the least of them my life hath end. I see a better state to me belongs Than that which on thy humor doth depend. Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie. O what a happy title do I find, Happy to have thy love, happy to die! But what’s so blessèd-fair that fears no blot? Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
So shall I live, supposing thou art true, Like a deceived husband; so love’s face May still seem love to me, though altered new: Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place. For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change. In many’s looks, the false heart’s history Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange, But heav'n in thy creation did decree That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart’s workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell. How like Eve’s apple doth thy beauty grow, If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They that have pow'r to hurt, and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who moving others are themselves as stone, Unmovèd, cold, and to temptation slow, They rightly do inherit heaven’s graces, And husband nature’s riches from expense. They are the lords and owners of their faces; Others but stewards of their excellence. The summer’s flow'r is to the summer sweet, Though to itself it only live and die. But if that flow'r with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity. For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose, Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose! That tongue that tells the story of thy days, Making lascivious comments on thy sport, Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise; Naming thy name blesses an ill report. O what a mansion have those vices got Which for their habitation chose out thee, Where beauty’s veil doth cover every blot, And all things turns to fair that eyes can see! Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; The hardest knife ill used doth lose his edge.
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness, Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; Both grace and faults are loved of more and less; Thou mak’st faults graces that to thee resort. As on the finger of a thronèd queen The basest jewel will be well esteemed, So are those errors that in thee are seen To truths translated, and for true things deemed. How many lambs might the stern wolf betray, If like a lamb he could his looks translate; How many gazers mightst thou lead away, If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! But do not so. I love thee in such sort, As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
How like a winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! What old December’s bareness everywhere! And yet this time removed was summer’s time, The teeming autumn big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime, Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease. Yet this abundant issue seemed to me But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit. For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And thou away, the very birds are mute. Or if they sing, ’tis with so dull a cheer That leaves look pale, dreading the winter’s near.
From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in everything, That heavy Saturn laughed and leapt with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell Of different flow'rs in odor and in hue, Could make me any summer’s story tell, Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew. Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white, Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight, Drawn after you, you pattern of all those. Yet seemed it winter still, and, you away, As with your shadow I with these did play.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The forward violet thus did I chide: Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, If not from my love’s breath? The purple pride Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells In my love’s veins thou hast too grossly dyed. The lily I condemnèd for thy hand, And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair; The roses fearfully on thorns did stand, One blushing shame, another white despair; A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both, And to his robb'ry had annexed thy breath; But for his theft, in pride of all his growth A vengeful canker ate him up to death. More flow'rs I noted, yet I none could see But sweet or color it had stol'n from thee.
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget’st so long To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song, Dark'ning thy pow'r to lend base subjects light? Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem In gentle numbers time so idly spent; Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem, And gives thy pen both skill and argument. Rise, resty Muse; my love’s sweet face survey, If time have any wrinkle graven there; If any, be a satire to decay, And make time’s spoils despisèd everywhere. Give my love fame faster than time wastes life; So thou prevent’st his scythe and crookèd knife.
O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed? Both truth and beauty on my love depends; So dost thou too, and therein dignified. Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say Truth needs no color, with his color fixed, Beauty no pencil, beauty’s truth to lay; But best is best if never intermixed? Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? Excuse not silence so, for ’t lies in thee To make him much outlive a gilded tomb, And to be praised of ages yet to be. Then do thy office, Muse. I teach thee how To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
My love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming; I love not less, though less the show appear. That love is merchandised whose rich esteeming The owner’s tongue doth publish everywhere. Our love was new, and then but in the spring, When I was wont to greet it with my lays, As Philomel in summer’s front doth sing, And stops his pipe in growth of riper days. Not that the summer is less pleasant now Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough, And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. Therefore, like her, I sometime hold my tongue, Because I would not dull you with my song.
Alack, what poverty my muse brings forth, That having such a scope to show her pride, The argument all bare is of more worth Than when it hath my added praise beside! O blame me not if I no more can write! Look in your glass, and there appears a face That overgoes my blunt invention quite, Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace. Were it not sinful then, striving to mend, To mar the subject that before was well? For to no other pass my verses tend Than of your graces and your gifts to tell; And more, much more than in my verse can sit Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To me, fair friend, you never can be old, For as you were when first your eye I eyed, Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold Have from the forests shook three summers' pride; Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned In process of the seasons have I seen; Three April pérfumes in three hot Junes burned, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah yet doth beauty, like a dial hand, Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived; So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived. For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred: Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.
Let not my love be called idolatry, Nor my belovèd as an idol show, Since all alike my songs and praises be To one, of one, still such, and ever so. Kind is my love today, tomorrow kind, Still constant in a wondrous excellence; Therefore my verse to constancy confined, One thing expressing, leaves out difference. Fair, kind, and true is all my argument, Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words; And in this change is my invention spent— Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. Fair, kind, and true have often lived alone, Which three, till now, never kept seat in one.
When in the chronicle of wasted time I see descriptions of the fairest wights And beauty making beautiful old rhyme In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, Then in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, I see their ántique pen would have expressed Ev'n such a beauty as you master now. So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring, And for they looked but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing. For we which now behold these present days, Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Supposed as forfeit to a cónfined doom. The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured And the sad augurs mock their own preságe; Incertainties now crown themselves assured, And peace proclaims olives of endless age. Now with the drops of this most balmy time My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes, Since spite of him I’ll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes. And thou in this shalt find thy monument, When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
What’s in the brain that ink may character Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit? What’s new to speak, what now to register, That may express my love or thy dear merit? Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine, I must each day say o'er the very same, Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, Ev'n as when first I hallowed thy fair name. So that eternal love in love’s fresh case Weighs not the dust and injury of age, Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, But makes antiquity for aye his page, Finding the first conceit of love there bred Where time and outward form would show it dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seemed my flame to qualify. As easy might I from myself depart As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie. That is my home of love; if I have ranged, Like him that travels I return again, Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, So that myself bring water for my stain. Never believe, though in my nature reigned All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stained To leave for nothing all thy sum of good. For nothing this wide universe I call, Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
Alas ’tis true, I have gone here and there, And made myself a motley to the view, Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offenses of affections new. Most true it is that I have looked on truth Askance and strangely; but by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays proved thee my best of love. Now all is done, save what shall have no end; Mine appetite I never more will grind On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confined. Then give me welcome, next my heav'n the best, Ev'n to thy pure and most most loving breast.
O for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdued To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand: Pity me then, and wish I were renewed, Whilst like a willing patient I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; No bitterness that I will bitter think, Nor double penance, to correct correction. Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye, Ev'n that your pity is enough to cure me.
Your love and pity doth th' impression fill Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow; For what care I who calls me well or ill, So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? You are my all the world, and I must strive To know my shames and praises from your tongue; None else to me, nor I to none alive, That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong. In so profound abysm I throw all care Of others' voices, that my adder’s sense To critic and to flatt’rer stoppèd are. Mark how with my neglect I do dispense: You are so strongly in my purpose bred That all the world besides methinks y'are dead.
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind, And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function, and is partly blind, Seems seeing, but effectually is out; For it no form delivers to the heart Of bird, of flow'r, or shape which it doth latch. Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight, The most sweet favor or deformèd’st creature, The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night, The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature. Incapable of more, replete with you, My most true mind thus makes mine untrue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you, Drink up the monarch’s plague, this flattery? Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true, And that your love taught it this alchemy, To make of monsters and things indigest Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, Creating every bad a perfect best As fast as objects to his beams assemble? O ’tis the first; ’tis flattery in my seeing, And my great mind most kingly drinks it up. Mine eye well knows what with his gust is greeing, And to his palate doth prepare the cup. If it be poisoned, ’tis the lesser sin That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
Those lines that I before have writ do lie, Ev'n those that said I could not love you dearer. Yet then my judgment knew no reason why My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. But reck'ning time, whose millioned accidents Creep in ’twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp’st intents, Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things. Alas, why, fearing of time’s tyranny, Might I not then say, “Now I love you best,” When I was certain o'er incertainty, Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? Love is a babe; then might I not say so, To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds, Or bends with the remover to remove. O no, it is an ever-fixèd mark That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wand'ring bark, Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken. Love’s not time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle’s compass come: Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom. If this be error and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all Wherein I should your great deserts repay, Forgot upon your dearest love to call, Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day; That I have frequent been with unknown minds, And giv'n to time your own dear purchased right; That I have hoisted sail to all the winds Which should transport me farthest from your sight. Book both my willfulness and errors down, And on just proof surmise accumulate. Bring me within the level of your frown, But shoot not at me in your wakened hate, Since my appeal says I did strive to prove The constancy and virtue of your love.
Like as to make our appetites more keen With eager compounds we our palate urge; As, to prevent our maladies unseen, We sicken to shun sickness when we purge; Ev'n so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding; And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness To be diseased ere that there was true needing. Thus policy in love, t' anticipate The ills that were not, grew to faults assured, And brought to medicine a healthful state Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured; But thence I learn, and find the lesson true, Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What potions have I drunk of siren tears, Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within, Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, Still losing when I saw myself to win! What wretched errors hath my heart committed, Whilst it hath thought itself so blessèd never! How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted In the distraction of this madding fever! O benefit of ill, now I find true That better is by evil still made better; And ruined love when it is built anew Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. So I return rebuked to my content, And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.
That you were once unkind befriends me now, And for that sorrow which I then did feel Needs must I under my transgression bow, Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel. For if you were by my unkindness shaken, As I by yours, you’ve passed a hell of time, And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken To weigh how once I suffered in your crime. O that our night of woe might have rememb’red My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, And soon to you as you to me then tendered The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits! But that your trespass now becomes a fee; Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed, When not to be receives reproach of being, And the just pleasure lost which is so deemed Not by our feeling but by others' seeing. For why should others' false adulterate eyes Give salutation to my sportive blood? Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, Which in their wills count bad what I think good? No, I am that I am, and they that level At my abuses reckon up their own; I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel. By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown, Unless this general evil they maintain: All men are bad, and in their badness reign.
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain Full charactered with lasting memory, Which shall above that idle rank remain Beyond all date, ev'n to eternity; Or at the least, so long as brain and heart Have faculty by nature to subsist; Till each to razed oblivion yield his part Of thee, thy record never can be missed. That poor retention could not so much hold, Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score; Therefore to give them from me was I bold, To trust those tables that receive thee more; To keep an adjunct to remember thee Were to import forgetfulness in me.
No! Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change. Thy pyramids built up with newer might To me are nothing novel, nothing strange; They are but dressings of a former sight. Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire What thou dost foist upon us that is old, And rather make them born to our desire Than think that we before have heard them told. Thy registers and thee I both defy, Not wond'ring at the present nor the past; For thy recórds and what we see doth lie, Made more or less by thy continual haste. This I do vow and this shall ever be: I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If my dear love were but the child of state, It might for Fortune’s bastard be unfathered, As subject to time’s love or to time’s hate, Weeds among weeds, or flow'rs with flowers gathered. No, it was builded far from accident; It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls Under the blow of thrallèd discontent, Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls. It fears not policy, that heretic, Which works on leases of short numb’red hours. But all alone stands hugely politic, That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers. To this I witness call the fools of time, Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
Were’t ought to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honoring, Or laid great bases for eternity, Which prove more short than waste or ruining? Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor Lose all and more by paying too much rent, For compound sweet forgoing simple savor, Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? No, let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free, Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art, But mutual render, only me for thee. Hence, thou suborned informer! A true soul When most impeached stands least in thy control.
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy pow'r Dost hold time’s fickle glass, his sickle hour, Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow’st— If nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose: that her skill May time disgrace, and wretched minute kill. Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure; She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure. Her audit, though delayed, answered must be, And her quietus is to render thee. ( )( )
In the old age black was not counted fair, Or if it were, it bore not beauty’s name. But now is black beauty’s successive heir, And beauty slandered with a bastard shame. For since each hand hath put on nature’s pow'r, Fairing the foul with art’s false borrowed face, Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bow'r, But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace. Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black, Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack, Sland'ring creation with a false esteem. Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe, That every tongue says beauty should look so.
How oft when thou, my music, music play’st Upon that blessèd wood whose motion sounds With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway’st The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, Do I envy' those jacks that nimble leap To kiss the tender inward of thy hand, Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap, At the wood’s boldness by thee blushing stand. To be so tickled they would change their state And situation with those dancing chips, O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, Making dead wood more blest than living lips. Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action, and till action, lust Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, Enjoyed no sooner but despisèd straight, Past reason hunted, and no sooner had, Past reason hated as a swallowed bait On purpose laid to make the taker mad; Mad in pursuit, and in possession so, Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe; Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream. All this the world well knows, yet none knows well To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; Coral is far more red than her lips' red; If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head; I have seen roses damasked, red and white, But no such roses see I in her cheeks; And in some pérfumes is there more delight Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. I love to hear her speak, yet well I know That music hath a far more pleasing sound. I grant I never saw a goddess go; My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground. And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare As any she belied with false compare.
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; For well thou know’st, to my dear doting heart Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel. Yet in good faith some say, that thee behold, Thy face hath not the pow'r to make love groan. To say they err I dare not be so bold, Although I swear it to myself alone; And to be sure that is not false, I swear A thousand groans but thinking on thy face; One on another’s neck do witness bear Thy black is fairest in my judgment’s place. In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, Have put on black, and loving mourners be, Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain; And truly, not the morning sun of heav'n Better becomes the gray cheeks of the east, Nor that full star that ushers in the ev'n Doth half that glory to the sober west, As those two mourning eyes become thy face. O let it then as well beseem thy heart To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace, And suit thy pity like in every part. Then will I swear beauty herself is black, And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan For that deep wound it gives my friend and me; Is’t not enough to torture me alone, But slave to slavery my sweet’st friend must be? Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken, And my next self thou harder hast engrossed; Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken, A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed. Prison my heart in thy steel bosom’s ward, But then my friend’s heart let my poor heart bail. Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard; Thou canst not then use rigor in my jail. And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee, Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So now I have confessed that he is thine, And I myself am mortgaged to thy will, Myself I’ll forfeit, so that other mine Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still. But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, For thou art covetous, and he is kind. He learned but surety-like to write for me, Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that put’st forth all to use, And sue a friend came debtor for my sake; So him I lose through my unkind abuse. Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me; He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will, And Will to boot, and Will in overplus; More than enough am I, that vex thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus. Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in others seem right gracious, And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, And in abundance addeth to his store; So thou, being rich in Will, add to thy Will One will of mine, to make thy large Will more. Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill; Think all but one, and me in that one Will.
If thy soul check thee that I come so near, Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will, And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there; Thus far for love my love-suit sweet fulfill. Will will fulfill the treasure of thy love, Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one. In things of great receipt with ease we prove Among a number one is reckoned none. Then in the number let me pass untold, Though in thy store’s account I one must be. For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold That nothing me, a something sweet to thee. Make but my name thy love, and love that still; And then thou lov’st me, for my name is Will.
Thou blind fool love, what dost thou to mine eyes, That they behold, and see not what they see? They know what beauty is, see where it lies, Yet what the best is take the worst to be. If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks Be anchored in the bay where all men ride, Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forgèd hooks, Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? Why should my heart think that a several plot Which my heart knows the wide world’s common place? Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not, To put fair truth upon so foul a face? In things right true my heart and eyes have erred, And to this false plague are they now transferred.
When my love swears that she is made of truth I do believe her, though I know she lies, That she might think me some untutored youth Unlearnèd in the world’s false subtleties. Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, Although she knows my days are past the best, Simply I credit her false speaking tongue; On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed. But wherefore says she not she is unjust? And wherefore say not I that I am old? O love’s best habit is in seeming trust, And age in love loves not t' have years told. Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, And in our faults by lies we flattered be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O call not me to justify the wrong That thy unkindness lays upon my heart. Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue; Use pow'r with pow'r, and slay me not by art. Tell me thou lov’st elsewhére; but in my sight, Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside. What need’st thou wound with cunning when thy might Is more than my o'er-pressed defense can bide? Let me excuse thee: Ah, my love well knows Her pretty looks have been mine enemies, And therefore from my face she turns my foes, That they elsewhére might dart their injuries. Yet do not so, but since I am near slain, Kill me outr'ght with looks, and rid my pain.
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain, Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain. If I might teach thee wit, better it were, Though not to love, yet love, to tell me so, As testy sick men, when their deaths be near, No news but health from their physicians know. For if I should despair, I should grow mad, And in my madness might speak ill of thee. Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, Mad sland’rers by mad ears believèd be. That I may not be so, nor thou belied, Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note; But ’tis my heart that loves what they despise, Who in despite of view is pleased to dote. Nor are mine ears with thy tongue’s tune delighted, Nor tender feeling to base touches prone, Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited To any sensual feast with thee alone. But my five wits, nor my five senses, can Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man, Thy proud heart’s slave and vassal wretch to be. Only my plague thus far I count my gain, That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving. O but with mine compare thou thine own state, And thou shalt find it merits not reproving; Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, That have profaned their scarlet ornaments And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine, Robbed others' beds' revénues of their rents. Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov’st those Whom thine eyes woo as mine impórtune thee. Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows, Thy pity may deserve to pitied be. If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, By self-example mayst thou be denied.
Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch One of her feathered creatures broke away, Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch In púrsuit of the thing she would have stay; Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent To follow that which flies before her face, Not prizing her poor infant’s discontent: So run’st thou after that which flies from thee, Whilst I, thy babe, chase thee afar behind. But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, And play the mother’s part, kiss me, be kind. So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will, If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Two loves I have, of comfort and despair, Which, like two spirits, do suggest me still; The better angel is a man right fair, The worser spirit a woman colored ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil Tempteth my better angel from my side, And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride. And whether that my angel be turned fiend Suspect I may, but not directly tell; But being both from me both to each friend, I guess one angel in another’s hell. Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Those lips that love’s own hand did make Breathed forth the sound that said “I hate” To me that languished for her sake; But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come, Chiding that tongue that, ever sweet, Was used in giving gentle doom, And taught it thus anew to greet: “I hate” she altered with an end That followed it as gentle day Doth follow night, who like a fiend From heav'n to hell is flown away. “I hate” from hate away she threw, And saved my life, saying “not you.”
Poor soul, the center of my sinful earth, [Thrall to] these rebel pow'rs that thee array, Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess, Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body’s end? Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant’s loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more. So shalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men, And death once dead, there’s no more dying then.
My love is as a fever, longing still For that which longer nurseth the disease, Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please. My reason, the physician to my love, Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, Hath left me, and I desp'rate now approve Desire is death, which physic did except. Past cure I am, now reason is past care, And frantic mad with evermore unrest, My thoughts and my discourse as madmen’s are, At random from the truth vainly expressed; For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright, Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
O me! what eyes hath love put in my head, Which have no correspondence with true sight! Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, That censures falsely what they see aright? If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, What means the world to say it is not so? If it be not, then love doth well denote Love’s eye is not so true as all men’s: no, How can it? O how can love’s eye be true, That is so vexed with watching and with tears? No marvel then, though I mistake my view; The sun itself sees not till heaven clears. O cunning love! With tears thou keep’st me blind, Lest eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Canst thou, O cruel, say I love thee not, When I against myself with thee partake? Do I not think on thee, when I forgot Am of myself, all, tyrant, for thy sake? Who hateth thee that I do call my friend? On whom frown’st thou that I do fawn upon? Nay, if thou lour’st on me, do I not spend Revenge upon myself with present moan? What merit do I in myself respect, That is so proud thy service to despise, When all my best doth worship thy defect, Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind; Those that can see thou lov’st, and I am blind.
O from what pow'r hast thou this pow'rful might, With insufficiency my heart to sway, To make me give the lie to my true sight, And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, That in the very refuse of thy deeds There is such strength and warrantise of skill That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds? Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, The more I hear and see just cause of hate? O, though I love what others do abhor, With others thou shouldst not abhor my state. If thy unworthiness raised love in me, More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
Love is too young to know what conscience is, Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss, Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove; For, thou betraying me, I do betray My nobler part to my gross body’s treason. My soul doth tell my body that he may Triumph in love—flesh stays no father reason, But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee As his triumphant prize—proud of this pride, He is contented thy poor drudge to be, To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. No want of conscience hold it that I call Her “love” for whose dear love I rise and fall.
In loving thee thou know’st I am forsworn; But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing, In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn, In vowing new hate after new love bearing. But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, When I break twenty? I am perjured most, For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, And all my honest faith in thee is lost; For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy, And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, Or made them swear against the thing they see. For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured eye, To swear against the truth so foul a lie.
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep. A maid of Dian’s this advantage found, And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep In a cold valley-fountain of that ground, Which borrowed from this holy fire of love A dateless lively heat, still to endure, And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove Against strange maladies a sovereign cure. But at my mistress' eye love’s brand new fired, The boy for trial needs would touch my breast; I, sick withal, the help of bath desired, And thither hied, a sad distempered guest, But found no cure; the bath for my help lies Where Cupid got new fire—my mistress' eye.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The little love-god lying once asleep Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand, Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand The fairest votary took up that fire, Which many legions of true hearts had warmed; And so the general of hot desire Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed. This brand she quenchèd in a cool well by, Which from love’s fire took heat perpetual, Growing a bath and healthful remedy For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall, Came there for cure, and this by that I prove: Love’s fire heats water; water cools not love.
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall,And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more. I am not partial to infringe our laws. The enmity and discord which of late Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, Have seal’d his rigorous statutes with their bloods, Excludes all pity from our threatening looks. For, since the mortal and intestine jars 'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, It hath in solemn synods been decreed Both by the Syracusians and ourselves, To admit no traffic to our adverse towns. Nay, more, if any born at Ephesus Be seen at any Syracusian marts and fairs; Again, if any Syracusian born Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies, His goods confiscate to the Duke’s dispose, Unless a thousand marks be levièd To quit the penalty and to ransom him. Thy substance, valued at the highest rate, Cannot amount unto a hundred marks; Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the causeWhy thou dep-artedst from thy native homeAnd for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A heavier task could not have been imposed Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable; Yet, that the world may witness that my end Was wrought by nature, not by vile offense, I’ll utter what my sorrow gives me leave. In Syracusa was I born, and wed Unto a woman happy but for me, And by me, had not our hap been bad. With her I lived in joy. Our wealth increased By prosperous voyages I often made To Epidamnum, till my factor’s death And the great care of goods at random left Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; From whom my absence was not six months old Before herself— almost at fainting under The pleasing punishment that women bear— Had made provision for her following me And soon and safe arrivèd where I was. There had she not been long but she became A joyful mother of two goodly sons, And, which was strange, the one so like the other As could not be distinguished but by names. That very hour, and in the selfsame inn, A meaner woman was deliverèd Of such a burden, male twins, both alike. Those, for their parents were exceeding poor, I bought and brought up to attend my sons. My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, Made daily motions for our home return. Unwilling, I agreed. Alas, too soon We came aboard. A league from Epidamnum had we sailed Before the always-wind-obeying deep Gave any tragic instance of our harm; But longer did we not retain much hope; For what obscured light the heavens did grant Did but convey unto our fearful minds A doubtful warrant of immediate death, Which though myself would gladly have embraced, Yet the incessant weepings of my wife, Weeping before for what she saw must come, And piteous plainings of the pretty babes, That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear, Forced me to seek delays for them and me. And this it was, for other means was none: The sailors sought for safety by our boat And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us. My wife, more careful for the latter-born, Had fastened him unto a small spare mast, Such as seafaring men provide for storms. To him one of the other twins was bound, Whilst I had been like heedful of the other. The children thus disposed, my wife and I, Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, Fastened ourselves at either end the mast And, floating straight, obedient to the stream, Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought. At length the sun, gazing upon the earth, Dispersed those vapors that offended us, And by the benefit of his wished light The seas waxed calm, and we discoverèd Two ships from far, making amain to us, Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this. But ere they came,— O, let me say no more! Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay, forward, old man. Do not break off so,For we may pity though not pardon thee.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now Worthily termed them merciless to us. For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues, We were encountered by a mighty rock, Which being violently borne upon, Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; So that, in this unjust divorce of us, Fortune had left to both of us alike What to delight in, what to sorrow for. Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdenèd With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe, Was carried with more speed before the wind, And in our sight they three were taken up By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought. At length, another ship had seized on us And, knowing whom it was their hap to save, Gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests, And would have reft the fishers of their prey Had not their bark been very slow of sail; And therefore homeward did they bend their course. Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss; That by misfortunes was my life prolonged To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,Do me the favour to dilate at fullWhat hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care, At eighteen years became inquisitive After his brother, and importuned me That his attendant— so his case was like, Reft of his brother, but retained his name— Might bear him company in the quest of him, Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see, I hazarded the loss of whom I loved. Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece, Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia, And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus, Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought Or that or any place that harbors men. But here must end the story of my life; And happy were I in my timely death Could all my travels warrant me they live.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hapless Egeon, whom the fates have marked To bear the extremity of dire mishap, Now, trust me, were it not against our laws, Against my crown, my oath, my dignity, Which princes, would they, may not disannul, My soul would sue as advocate for thee. But though thou art adjudgèd to the death, And passèd sentence may not be recalled But to our honour’s great disparagement, Yet will I favor thee in what I can. Therefore, merchant, I’ll limit thee this day To seek thy life by beneficial help. Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus; Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, And live. If no, then thou art doom’d to die.— Jailer, take him to thy custody.
I will, my lord.
Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend,But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum, Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate. This very day a Syracusian merchant Is apprehended for arrival here And, not being able to buy out his life, According to the statute of the town Dies ere the weary sun set in the west. There is your money that I had to keep.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host, And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee. Within this hour it will be dinnertime. Till that, I’ll view the manners of the town, Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, And then return and sleep within mine inn, For with long travel I am stiff and weary. Get thee away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Many a man would take you at your wordAnd go indeed, having so good a mean.
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,When I am dull with care and melancholy,Lightens my humor with his merry jests.What, will you walk with me about the townAnd then go to my inn and dine with me?
I am invited, sir, to certain merchants, Of whom I hope to make much benefit. I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock, Please you, I’ll meet with you upon the mart And afterward consort you till bedtime. My present business calls me from you now.
Farewell till then. I will go lose myselfAnd wander up and down to view the city.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He that commends me to mine own content Commends me to the thing I cannot get. I to the world am like a drop of water That in the ocean seeks another drop, Who, falling there to find his fellow forth, Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself. So I, to find a mother and a brother, In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
Here comes the almanac of my true date.—What now? How chance thou art returned so soon?
Returned so soon? Rather approach’d too late! The capon burns; the pig falls from the spit; The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell; My mistress made it one upon my cheek. She is so hot because the meat is cold; The meat is cold because you come not home; You come not home because you have no stomach; You have no stomach, having broke your fast; But we that know what ’tis to fast and pray Are penitent for your default today.
Stop in your wind, sir. Tell me this, I pray:Where have you left the money that I gave you?
O, sixpence, that I had o' Wednesday lastTo pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am not in a sportive humor now. Tell me, and dally not: where is the money? We being strangers here, how dar’st thou trust So great a charge from thine own custody?
I pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner. I from my mistress come to you in post; If I return, I shall be post indeed, For she will scour your fault upon my pate. Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, And strike you home without a messenger.
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season. Reserve them till a merrier hour than this. Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
To me, sir? Why, you gave no gold to me!
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My charge was but to fetch you from the mart Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner. My mistress and her sister stays for you.
Now, as I am a Christian, answer me In what safe place you have bestowed my money, Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours That stands on tricks when I am undisposed. Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
I have some marks of yours upon my pate, Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders, But not a thousand marks between you both. If I should pay your worship those again, Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?
Your worship’s wife, my mistress at the Phoenix,She that doth fast till you come home to dinnerAnd prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave. [beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS]
What mean you, sir? For God’s sake, hold your hands.Nay, an you will not, sir, I’ll take my heels.
Upon my life, by some device or other The villain is o'erraught of all my money. They say this town is full of cozenage, As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind, Soul-killing witches that deform the body, Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks, And many suchlike liberties of sin. If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner. I’ll to the Centaur to go seek this slave. I greatly fear my money is not safe.
Neither my husband nor the slave returned That in such haste I sent to seek his master? Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him, And from the mart he’s somewhere gone to dinner. Good sister, let us dine and never fret. A man is master of his liberty; Time is their master, and when they see time They’ll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why should their liberty than ours be more?
Because their business still lies out o' door.
Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
There’s none but asses will be bridled so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, headstrong liberty is lashed with woe. There’s nothing situate under heaven’s eye But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky. The beasts, the fishes, and the wingèd fowls Are their males' subjects and at their controls. Man, more divine, the masters of all these, Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas, Endued with intellectual sense and souls, Of more preeminence than fish and fowls, Are masters to their females, and their lords. Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
Ere I learn love, I’ll practice to obey.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How if your husband start some otherwhere?
Till he come home again, I would forbear.
Patience unmoved! No marvel though she pause; They can be meek that have no other cause. A wretched soul, bruised with adversity We bid be quiet when we hear it cry, But were we burdened with like weight of pain, As much or more we should ourselves complain. So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee, With urging helpless patience would relieve me; But, if thou live to see like right bereft, This fool-begged patience in thee will be left.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.Here comes your man. Now is your husband nigh.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, he’s at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.
Say, didst thou speak with him? Know’st thou his mind?
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
Spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?
Nay, he struck so plainly I could too well feel his blows, and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But say, I prithee, is he coming home?It seems he hath great care to please his wife.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn mad.
Horn mad, thou villain!
I mean not cuckold mad, But sure he is stark mad. When I desired him to come home to dinner, He asked me for a thousand marks in gold. “'Tis dinnertime,” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he. “Your meat doth burn,” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he. “Will you come?” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he. “Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?” “The pig,” quoth I, “is burned.” “My gold,” quoth he. “My mistress, sir,” quoth I. “Hang up thy mistress! I know not thy mistress. Out on thy mistress!”
Quoth who?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Quoth my master.“I know,” quoth he, “no house, no wife, no mistress.”So that my errand, due unto my tongue,I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders,For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
Go back again and be new beaten home?For God’s sake, send some other messenger.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
And he will bless that cross with other beating.Between you, I shall have a holy head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hence, prating peasant! Fetch thy master home.
Am I so round with you as you with me,That like a football you do spurn me thus?You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither.If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.
His company must do his minions grace, Whilst I at home starve for a merry look. Hath homely age th' alluring beauty took From my poor cheek? Then he hath wasted it. Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit? If voluble and sharp discourse be marred, Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard. Do their gay vestments his affections bait? That’s not my fault; he’s master of my state. What ruins are in me that can be found By him not ruined? Then is he the ground Of my defeatures. My decayèd fair A sunny look of his would soon repair. But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale And feeds from home. Poor I am but his stale.
Self-harming jealousy, fie, beat it hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense. I know his eye doth homage otherwhere, Or else what lets it but he would be here? Sister, you know he promised me a chain. Would that alone o' love he would detain, So he would keep fair quarter with his bed. I see the jewel best enamelèd Will lose his beauty. Yet the gold bides still That others touch, and often touching will Wear gold; yet no man that hath a name By falsehood and corruption doth it shame. Since that my beauty cannot please his eye, I’ll weep what’s left away, and weeping die.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave Is wandered forth, in care to seek me out. By computation and mine host’s report, I could not speak with Dromio since at first I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
How now, sir? is your merry humor altered? As you love strokes, so jest with me again. You know no Centaur? You received no gold? Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner? My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad, That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.
Villain, thou didst deny the gold’s receiptAnd told’st me of a mistress and a dinner,For which, I hope, thou felt’st I was displeased.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein.What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me?
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?Think’st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that and that. [beats DROMIO OF SYRACUSE
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hold, sir, for God’s sake! Now your jest is earnest.Upon what bargain do you give it me?
Because that I familiarly sometimes Do use you for my fool and chat with you, Your sauciness will jest upon my love And make a common of my serious hours. When the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport, But creep in crannies when he hides his beams. If you will jest with me, know my aspect, And fashion your demeanor to my looks, Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
“Sconce” call you it? So you would leave battering, I had rather have it a “head.” An you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I pray, sir, why am I beaten?
Dost thou not know?
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I tell you why?
Ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath a wherefore.
“Why” first: for flouting me; and then “wherefore”: forurging it the second time to me.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,When in the “why” and the “wherefore” is neither rhyme nor reason?Well, sir, I thank you.
Thank me, sir, for what?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
I’ll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. But say, sir, is it dinnertime?
No, sir, I think the meat wants that I have.
In good time, sir, what’s that?
Basting.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sir, then ’twill be dry.
If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.
Your reason?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time. There’s a time for all things.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.
By what rule, sir?
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of FatherTime himself.
Let’s hear it.
There’s no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May he not do it by fine and recovery?
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, soplentiful an excrement?
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, andwhat he hath scanted men in hair, he hath given them inwit.
Why, but there’s many a man hath more hair than wit.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.
For what reason?
For two, and sound ones too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, not sound, I pray you.
Sure ones, then.
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
Certain ones, then.
Name them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.
You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.
Marry, and did, sir: namely, e'en no time to recover hair lost by nature.
But your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore, to the world’s end, will have bald followers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I knew ’twould be a bald conclusion:But soft, who wafts us yonder?
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown. Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects. I am not Adriana, nor thy wife. The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow That never words were music to thine ear, That never object pleasing in thine eye, That never touch well welcome to thy hand, That never meat sweet-savored in thy taste, Unless I spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee. How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it That thou art thus estranged from thyself? Thy "self" I call it, being strange to me, That, undividable, incorporate, Am better than thy dear self’s better part. Ah, do not tear away thyself from me! For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall A drop of water in the breaking gulf, And take unmingled thence that drop again Without addition or diminishing, As take from me thyself and not me too. How dearly would it touch thee to the quick, Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious And that this body, consecrate to thee, By ruffian lust should be contaminate! Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me, And hurl the name of husband in my face, And tear the stained skin off my harlot brow, And from my false hand cut the wedding ring, And break it with a deep-divorcing vow? I know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it. I am possessed with an adulterate blot; My blood is mingled with the crime of lust; For if we two be one, and thou play false, I do digest the poison of thy flesh, Being strumpeted by thy contagion. Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed, I live disstained, thou undishonorèd.
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not.In Ephesus I am but two hours old,As strange unto your town as to your talk,Who, every word by all my wit being scanned,Want wit in all one word to understand.
Fie, brother, how the world is changed with you!When were you wont to use my sister thus?She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
By Dromio?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By me?
By thee; and this thou didst return from him:That he did buffet thee and, in his blows,Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?What is the course and drift of your compact?
I, sir? I never saw her till this time.
Villain, thou liest; for even her very wordsDidst thou deliver to me on the mart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never spake with her in all my life.
How can she thus then call us by our names—Unless it be by inspiration?
How ill agrees it with your gravity To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave, Abetting him to thwart me in my mood. Be it my wrong you are from me exempt, But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt. Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine. Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine, Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state, Makes me with thy strength to communicate. If aught possess thee from me, it is dross, Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss, Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme. What, was I married to her in my dream? Or sleep I now and think I hear all this? What error drives our eyes and ears amiss? Until I know this sure uncertainty I’ll entertain the offered fallacy.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner. This is the fairy land. O spite of spites! We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites: If we obey them not, this will ensue: They’ll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Why prat’st thou to thyself and answer’st not?Dromio—thou, Dromio—thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.
I am transformèd, master, am I not?
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast thine own form.
No, I am an ape.
If thou art changed to aught, ’tis to an ass.
'Tis true. She rides me, and I long for grass.'Tis so. I am an ass; else it could never beBut I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool, To put the finger in the eye and weep Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn. Come, sir, to dinner. —Dromio, keep the gate. — Husband, I’ll dine above with you today, And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks. Sirrah, if any ask you for your master, Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.— Come, sister.—Dromio, play the porter well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?Sleeping or waking, mad or well-advised?Known unto these, and to myself disguised!I’ll say as they say, and persever so,And in this mist at all adventures go.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all; My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours. Say that I lingered with you at your shop To see the making of her carcanet, And that tomorrow you will bring it home. But here’s a villain that would face me down He met me on the mart, and that I beat him And charged him with a thousand marks in gold, And that I did deny my wife and house.— Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know.That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink,Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
I think thou art an ass.
Marry, so it doth appearBy the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.I should kick being kicked; and, being at that pass,You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
You’re sad, Signior Balthasar. Pray God our cheerMay answer my good will and your good welcome here.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Signior Balthasar, either at flesh or fishA table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.
And welcome more common, for that’s nothing but words.
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.But though my cates be mean, take them in good part.Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.But soft! My door is lock’d. [to DROMIO] Go, bid them let us in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Maud, Bridget, Marian, Ciceley, Gillian, Ginn!
[within] Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch.Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call’st for such storeWhen one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in the street.
[within] Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on ’s feet.
Who talks within there? Ho, open the door.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Right, sir, I’ll tell you when an you tell me wherefore.
Wherefore? For my dinner. I have not dined today.
[within] Nor today here you must not. Come again when you may.
What art thou that keep’st me out from the house I owe?
[within] The porter for this time, sir, and my name is Dromio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name!The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.If thou hadst been Dromio today in my place,Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.
[within] What a coil is there, Dromio! Who are those atthe gate?
Let my master in, Luce.
[within] Faith, no, he comes too late,And so tell your master.
O Lord, I must laugh.Have at you with a proverb: shall I set in my staff?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Have at you with another: that’s—When, can youtell?
[within] If thy name be called “Luce,” Luce, thou hast answered him well.
Do you hear, you minion? You’ll let us in, I hope?
[within] I thought to have asked you.
[within] And you said no.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, come, help. Well struck! There was blow for blow.
Thou baggage, let me in.
[within) Can you tell for whose sake?
Master, knock the door hard.
[within] Let him knock till it ache.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You’ll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.
[within] What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
[within] Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?
[within] By my troth, your town is troubled with unrulyboys.
Are you there, wife? You might have come before.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] Your wife, sir knave? Go, get you from the door.
If you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome. We would fain have either.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
They stand at the door, master. Bid them welcome hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.Your cake there is warm within; you stand here in the cold.It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.
Go, fetch me something: I’ll break ope the gate.
[within] Break any breaking here, and I’ll break your knave’s pate.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are butwind,Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][within] It seems thou want’st breaking. Out upon thee,hind!
Here’s too much “out upon thee!” I pray thee, let me in.
[within] Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.
Well, I’ll break in. Go, borrow me a crow.
A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?For a fish without a fin, there’s a fowl without a feather.— [To DROMIO OF SYRACUSE] If a crow help us in, sirrah, we’ll pluck a crow together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, get thee gone. Fetch me an iron crow.
Have patience, sir. O, let it not be so. Herein you war against your reputation, And draw within the compass of suspect Th' unviolated honor of your wife. Once this: your long experience of her wisdom, Her sober virtue, years, and modesty Plead on her part some cause to you unknown. And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse Why at this time the doors are made against you. Be ruled by me; depart in patience, And let us to the Tiger all to dinner, And about evening come yourself alone To know the reason of this strange restraint. If by strong hand you offer to break in Now in the stirring passage of the day, A vulgar comment will be made of it; And that supposèd by the common rout Against your yet ungallèd estimation That may with foul intrusion enter in And dwell upon your grave when you are dead; For slander lives upon succession, Forever housèd where it gets possession.
You have prevailed. I will depart in quiet And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry. I know a wench of excellent discourse, Pretty and witty, wild and yet, too, gentle. There will we dine. This woman that I mean, My wife—but, I protest, without desert— Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal; To her will we to dinner. [to ANGELO] Get you home And fetch the chain; by this I know ’tis made. Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine, For there’s the house. That chain will I bestow— Be it for nothing but to spite my wife— Upon mine hostess there. Good sir, make haste. Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, I’ll knock elsewhere, to see if they’ll disdain me.
I’ll meet you at that place some hour hence.
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And may it be that you have quite forgot A husband’s office? Shall, Antipholus, Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? If you did wed my sister for her wealth, Then for her wealth’s sake use her with more kindness. Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth— Muffle your false love with some show of blindness. Let not my sister read it in your eye; Be not thy tongue thy own shame’s orator; Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; Apparel vice like virtue’s harbinger. Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted? What simple thief brags of his own attaint? 'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed And let her read it in thy looks at board. Shame hath a bastard fame, well managèd; Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word. Alas, poor women, make us but believe, Being compact of credit, that you love us. Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve; We in your motion turn, and you may move us. Then, gentle brother, get you in again. Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife. 'Tis holy sport to be a little vain When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
Sweet mistress—what your name is else I know not, Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,— Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not Than our earth’s wonder, more than earth divine. Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak. Lay open to my earthy gross conceit, Smothered in errors, feeble, shallow, weak, The folded meaning of your words' deceit. Against my soul’s pure truth why labour you To make it wander in an unknown field? Are you a god? would you create me new? Transform me, then, and to your power I’ll yield. But if that I am I, then well I know Your weeping sister is no wife of mine, Nor to her bed no homage do I owe. Far more, far more, to you do I decline. O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note To drown me in thy sister’s flood of tears. Sing, Siren, for thyself, and I will dote. Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs, And as a bed I’ll take them and there lie, And in that glorious supposition think He gains by death that hath such means to die. Let Love, being light, be drownèd if she sink.
What, are you mad that you do reason so?
Not mad, but mated—how, I do not know.
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
Why call you me “love”? Call my sister so.
Thy sister’s sister.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That’s my sister.
No,It is thyself, mine own self’s better part,Mine eye’s clear eye, my dear heart’s dearer heart,My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope’s aim,My sole earth’s heaven, and my heaven’s claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
Call thyself “sister,” sweet, for I am thee.Thee will I love and with thee lead my life;Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife.Give me thy hand.
O soft, sir! Hold you still.I’ll fetch my sister to get her goodwill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, how now, Dromio. Where runn’st thou so fast?
Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? AmI myself?
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.
I am an ass, I am a woman’s man, and besides myself.
What woman’s man? And how besides thyself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, sir, besides myself I am due to a woman, one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
What claim lays she to thee?
Marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast; not that I being a beast she would have me, but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
What is she?
A very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say “sir-reverence.” I have but leanluck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How dost thou mean a “fat marriage”?
Marry, sir, she’s the kitchen wench, and all grease, and I know not what use to put her to but to make a lampof her and run from her by her own light. I warrant herrags and the tallow in them will burn a Poland winter. If she lives till doomsday, she’ll burn a week longer than the whole world.
What complexion is she of?
Swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. For why? She sweats a man may go overshoes in the grime of it.
That’s a fault that water will mend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, sir, ’tis in grain; Noah’s flood could not do it.
What’s her name?
Nell, sir, but her name and three quarters—that’s an ell and three quarters—will not measure her from hip to hip.
Then she bears some breadth?
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. She is spherical, like a globe. I could find out countries in her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In what part of her body stands Ireland?
Marry, sir, in her buttocks. I found it out by the bogs.
Where Scotland?
I found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.
Where France?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In her forehead, armed and reverted, making war againsther heir.
Where England?
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them. But I guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
Where Spain?
Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot in her breath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where America, the Indies?
O, sir, upon her nose, all o'er-embellished with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole armadas of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
O, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude: this drudgeor diviner laid claim to me, call’d me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what privy marks I had aboutme, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I, amazed, ran from her as a witch. And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, She had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i' th' wheel.
Go, hie thee presently. Post to the road. An if the wind blow any way from shore, I will not harbor in this town tonight. If any bark put forth, come to the mart, Where I will walk till thou return to me. If every one knows us, and we know none, 'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack, and be gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As from a bear a man would run for life,So fly I from her that would be my wife.
There’s none but witches do inhabit here, And therefore ’tis high time that I were hence. She that doth call me husband, even my soul Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister, Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace, Of such enchanting presence and discourse, Hath almost made me traitor to myself. But lest myself be guilty to self wrong, I’ll stop mine ears against the mermaid’s song.
Master Antipholus.
Ay, that’s my name.
I know it well, sir. Lo, here’s the chain.I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine;The chain unfinished made me stay thus long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is your will that I shall do with this?
What please yourself, sir. I have made it for you.
Made it for me, sir? I bespoke it not.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.Go home with it and please your wife withal,And soon at supper time I’ll visit youAnd then receive my money for the chain.
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are a merry man, sir. Fare you well.
What I should think of this I cannot tell, But this I think: there’s no man is so vain That would refuse so fair an offered chain. I see a man here needs not live by shifts When in the streets he meets such golden gifts. I’ll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay. If any ship put out, then straight away.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due, And since I have not much importuned you, Nor now I had not, but that I am bound To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage. Therefore make present satisfaction, Or I’ll attach you by this officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you Is growing to me by Antipholus. And in the instant that I met with you, He had of me a chain. At five o'clock I shall receive the money for the same. Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
That labor may you save. See where he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]While I go to the goldsmith’s house, go thou And buy a rope’s end. That will I bestow Among my wife and her confederates For locking me out of my doors by day. But soft. I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone. Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy a rope!
[to ANGELO] A man is well holp up that trusts to you! I promisèd your presence and the chain, But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me. Belike you thought our love would last too long If it were chained together, and therefore came not.
Saving your merry humor, here’s the note How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion, Which doth amount to three-odd ducats more Than I stand debted to this gentleman. I pray you, see him presently discharged, For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.
I am not furnished with the present money. Besides, I have some business in the town. Good signior, take the stranger to my house, And with you take the chain, and bid my wife Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof. Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.
No, bear it with you lest I come not time enough.
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have,Or else you may return without your money.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain.Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Lord! You use this dalliance to excuseYour breach of promise to the Porpentine.I should have chid you for not bringing it,But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
The hour steals on. I pray you, sir, dispatch.
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
Come, come. You know I gave it you even now.Either send the chain, or send me by some token.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie, now you run this humor out of breath.Come, where’s the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
My business cannot brook this dalliance. [to ANTIPHOLUS] Good sir, say whe'er you’ll answer me or no.If not, I’ll leave him to the Officer.
I answer you? What should I answer you?
The money that you owe me for the chain.
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You know I gave it you half an hour since.
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
I do, [to ANGELO] and charge you in the Duke’s name to obey me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This touches me in reputation.Either consent to pay this sum for me,Or I attach you by this officer.
Consent to pay thee that I never had?—Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar’st.
Here is thy fee. Arrest him, officer.I would not spare my brother in this caseIf he should scorn me so apparently.
I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dearAs all the metal in your shop will answer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus,To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum That stays but till her owner comes aboard, And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir, I have conveyed aboard, and I have bought The oil, the balsamum and aqua vitae. The ship is in her trim; the merry wind Blows fair from land. They stay for naught at all But for their owner, master, and yourself.
How now? A madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a ropeAnd told thee to what purpose and what end.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You sent me for a rope’s end as soon.You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
I will debate this matter at more leisure And teach your ears to list me with more heed. To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight. Give her this key, and tell her in the desk That’s cover’d o'er with Turkish tapestry There is a purse of ducats. Let her send it. Tell her I am arrested in the street, And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave. Begone.— On, officer, to prison till it come.
To Adriana. That is where we dined,Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.Thither I must, although against my will,For servants must their masters' minds fulfill.
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so? Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye That he did plead in earnest, yea or no? Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? What observation mad’st thou in this case Of his heart’s meteors tilting in his face?
First he denied you had in him no right.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Then pleaded I for you.
And what said he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That love i begged for you he begged of me.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words that in an honest suit might move.First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Did’st speak him fair?
Have patience, I beseech.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot, nor I will not hold me still; My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will. He is deformèd, crooked, old, and sere, Ill-faced, worse-bodied, shapeless everywhere, Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
Who would be jealous, then, of such a one?No evil lost is wailed when it is gone.
Ah, but I think him better than I say, And yet would herein others' eyes were worse. Far from her nest the lapwing cries away. My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
Here, go—the desk, the purse! Sweet, now make haste.
How hast thou lost thy breath?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By running fast.
Where is thy master, Dromio? Is he well?
No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell. A devil in an everlasting garment hath him, One whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel; A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough; A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff; A back-friend, a shoulder clapper, one that countermands The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands; A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well, One that before the judgment carries poor souls to hell.
Why, man, what is the matter?
I do not know the matter. He is ’rested on the case.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well,But he’s in a suit of buff which ’rested him; that can I tell.Will you send him, mistress, redemption—the money in his desk?
Go fetch it, sister.
This I wonder at,That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.Tell me, was he arrested on a bond?
Not on a bond, but on a stronger thing:A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, the chain?
No, no, the bell. 'Tis time that I were gone.It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.
The hours come back. That did I never hear.
O yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, he turns back for very fear.
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou reason!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Time is a very bankrupt and owes more than he’s worth to season. Nay, he’s a thief too. Have you not heard men say That time comes stealing on by night and day? If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way, Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
Go, Dromio. There’s the money. Bear it straight,And bring thy master home immediately.Come, sister, I am pressed down with conceit:Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
There’s not a man I meet but doth salute me As if I were their well-acquainted friend, And every one doth call me by my name. Some tender money to me; some invite me; Some other give me thanks for kindnesses; Some offer me commodities to buy. Even now a tailor called me in his shop And showed me silks that he had bought for me, And therewithal took measure of my body. Sure, these are but imaginary wiles, And lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Master, here’s The gold you sent me for. What, have yougot redemption of the picture of old Adam new-appareled?
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not that Adam that kept the Paradise, but that Adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the calf’s skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.
I understand thee not.
No? Why, ’tis a plain case: he that went, like a bass viol in a case of leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob and ’rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike.
What, thou meanest an officer?
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his bond; one that thinks aman always going to bed and says “God give you good rest.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any ships put forth tonight? May we be gone?
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark Expedition put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy Delay . Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
The fellow is distract, and so am I,And here we wander in illusions.Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.Is that the chain you promised me today?
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Master, is this Mistress Satan?
It is the devil.
Nay, she is worse; she is the devil’s dam, and here shecomes in the habit of a light wench. And thereof comes that the wenches say “God damn me” that’s as much to say“God make me a light wench.” It is written they appear to men like angels of light. Light is an effect of fire,and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn. Comenot near her.
Your man and you are marvelous merry, sir.Will you go with me? We’ll mend our dinner here.
Master, if you do, expect spoon meat; or bespeak a longspoon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, Dromio?
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with thedevil.
[to COURTESAN] Avoid then, fiend! What tell’st thou me of supping?Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress.I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinnerOr, for my diamond, the chain you promised,And I’ll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Some devils ask but the parings of one’s nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherrystone; but she, more covetous, would have a chain. Master, be wise. An if you give it her, the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you, sir, my ring or else the chain.I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
Avaunt, thou witch!—Come, Dromio, let us go.
“Fly pride,” says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad; Else would he never so demean himself. A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, And for the same he promised me a chain. Both one and other he denies me now. The reason that I gather he is mad, Besides this present instance of his rage, Is a mad tale he told today at dinner Of his own doors being shut against his entrance. Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits, On purpose shut the doors against his way. My way is now to hie home to his house And tell his wife that, being lunatic, He rushed into my house and took perforce My ring away. This course I fittest choose, For forty ducats is too much to lose.
Fear me not, man. I will not break away: I’ll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money, To warrant thee, as I am ’rested for. My wife is in a wayward mood today And will not lightly trust the messenger That I should be attached in Ephesus. I tell you, ’twill sound harshly in her ears.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes my man. I think he brings the money.How now, sir? Have you that I sent you for?
Here’s that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
But where’s the money?
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To a rope’s end, sir, and to that end am I returned.
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you. [beats DROMIOOF EPHESUS]
Good sir, be patient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, ’tis for me to be patient. I am in adversity.
Good now, hold thy tongue.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
Thou whoreson, senseless villain.
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.
I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long ears.—I have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me with beating. I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with it when I go from home, welcomed home with it when I return. Nay, I bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat, and I think whenhe hath lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
Come, go along. My wife is coming yonder.
Mistress, respice finem, respect your end, or rather, the prophecy like the parrot, “Beware the rope’s end.”
Wilt thou still talk? [beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS]
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How say you now? Is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less.—Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;Establish him in his true sense again,And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is my hand, and let it feel your ear. [strikes PINCH]
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man, To yield possession to my holy prayers And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight. I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.
Peace, doting wizard, peace. I am not mad.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressèd soul!
You minion, you, are these your customers? Did this companion with the saffron face Revel and feast it at my house today Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut And I denied to enter in my house?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O husband, God doth know you dined at home,Where would you had remained until this time,Free from these slanders and this open shame.
“Dined at home”? Thou villain, what sayest thou?
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
Were not my doors locked up and I shut out?
Perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And did not she herself revile me there?
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
Did not her kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In verity you did.—My bones bear witness,That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
[To PINCH] Is’t good to soothe him in these contraries?
It is no shame. The fellow finds his veinAnd, yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.
[to ADRIANA ] Thou hast suborned the goldsmith to arrestme.
Alas, I sent you money to redeem youBy Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Money by me! heart and goodwill you might,But surely, master, not a rag of money.
Went’st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
He came to me, and I delivered it.
And I am witness with her that she did.
God and the rope-maker bear me witnessThat I was sent for nothing but a rope.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistress, both man and master is possessed. I know it by their pale and deadly looks. They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
[to ADRIANA ] Say wherefore didst thou lock me forth today. [to DROMIO OF EPHESUS ] And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
And, gentle master, I received no gold.But I confess, sir, that we were locked out.
Dissembling villain, thou speak’st false in both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all, And art confederate with a damnèd pack To make a loathsome abject scorn of me. But with these nails I’ll pluck out these false eyes That would behold in me this shameful sport.
O bind him, bind him! Let him not come near me.
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
What, will you murder me?—Thou jailer, thou,I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer themTo make a rescue?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Masters, let him go.He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?Hast thou delight to see a wretched manDo outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner. If I let him go,The debt he owes will be required of me.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee.Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.—Good Master Doctor, see him safe conveyedHome to my house. O most unhappy day!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O most unhappy strumpet!
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
Out on thee, villain! Wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing? Be mad, good master.Cry “The devil!”
God help poor souls! How idly do they talk!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
Say now whose suit is he arrested at.
One Angelo, a goldsmith. Do you know him?
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
Two hundred ducats.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, how grows it due?
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a chain for me but had it not.
Whenas your husband all in rage todayCame to my house and took away my ring,The ring I saw upon his finger now,Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.—Come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is.I long to know the truth hereof at large.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God for Thy mercy, they are loose again!
And come with naked swords. Let’s call more helpTo have them bound again.
Away! They’ll kill us.
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come to the Centaur. Fetch our stuff from thence.I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith, stay here this night. They will surely do us no harm. You saw they speak us fair, give us gold. Methinksthey are such a gentle nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me, i could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn witch.
I will not stay tonight for all the town.Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
I am sorry, sir, that I have hindered you,But I protest he had the chain of me,Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
How is the man esteemed here in the city?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of very reverend reputation, sir,Of credit infinite, highly beloved,Second to none that lives here in the city.His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.
'Tis so; and that self chain about his neck Which he forswore most monstrously to have. Good sir, draw near to me. I’ll speak to him.— Signior Antipholus, I wonder much That you would put me to this shame and trouble, And not without some scandal to yourself, With circumstance and oaths so to deny This chain, which now you wear so openly. Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, You have done wrong to this my honest friend, Who, but for staying on our controversy, Had hoisted sail and put to sea today. This chain you had of me. Can you deny it?
I think I had. I never did deny it.
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
These ears of mine, thou know’st did hear thee.Fie on thee, wretch. 'Tis pity that thou liv’stTo walk where any honest men resort.
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus.I’ll prove mine honor and mine honestyAgainst thee presently if thou dar’st stand.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
Hold, hurt him not, for God’s sake. He is mad.—Some get within him; take his sword away.Bind dromio too, and bear them to my house!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Run, master, run. For God’s sake, take a house.This is some priory. In, or we are spoiled.
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.Let us come in, that we may bind him fastAnd bear him home for his recovery.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long hath this possession held the man?
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,And much different from the man he was.But till this afternoon his passionNe'er brake into extremity of rage.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea? Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye Stray’d his affection in unlawful love, A sin prevailing much in youthful men Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing? Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
To none of these, except it be the last,Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
You should for that have reprehended him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, so I did.
Ay, but not rough enough.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
Haply in private.
And in assemblies too.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but not enough.
It was the copy of our conference. In bed he slept not for my urging it; At board he fed not for my urging it. Alone, it was the subject of my theme; In company I often glancèd it. Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
And thereof came it that the man was mad. The venom clamors of a jealous woman Poisons more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth. It seems his sleeps were hinder’d by thy railing, And therefore comes it that his head is light. Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings. Unquiet meals make ill digestions. Thereof the raging fire of fever bred, And what’s a fever but a fit of madness? Thou sayest his sports were hinderd by thy brawls. Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue But moody and dull melancholy, Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair, And at her heels a huge infectious troop Of pale distemperatures and foes to life? In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest To be disturbed, would mad or man or beast. The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
She never reprehended him but mildlyWhen he demeaned himself rough, rude, and wildly.— [to ADRIANA] Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
She did betray me to my own reproof.Good people, enter and lay hold on him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,And it shall privilege him from your handsTill I have brought him to his wits againOr lose my labor in assaying it.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,Diet his sickness, for it is my officeAnd will have no attorney but myself;And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient, for I will not let him stir Till I have used the approvd means I have, With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers, To make of him a formal man again. It is a branch and parcel of mine oath, A charitable duty of my order. Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will not hence and leave my husband here;And ill it doth beseem your holinessTo separate the husband and the wife.
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.
Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feetAnd never rise until my tears and prayersHave won his grace to come in person hitherAnd take perforce my husband from the Abbess.
By this, I think, the dial points at five.Anon, I’m sure, the Duke himself in personComes this way to the melancholy vale,The place of death and sorry executionBehind the ditches of the abbey here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Upon what cause?
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,Who put unluckily into this bayAgainst the laws and statutes of this town,Beheaded publicly for his offense.
See where they come. We will behold his death.
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,If any friend will pay the sum for him,He shall not die; so much we tender him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Justice, most sacred duke, against the Abbess.
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady.It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
May it please your Grace, Antipholus my husband, Whom I made lord of me and all I had At your important letters, this ill day A most outrageous fit of madness took him, That desp'rately he hurried through the street, With him his bondman, all as mad as he, Doing displeasure to the citizens By rushing in their houses, bearing thence Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like. Once did I get him bound and sent him home Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went That here and there his fury had committed. Anon, I wot not by what strong escape, He broke from those that had the guard of him, And with his mad attendant and himself, Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords, Met us again and, madly bent on us, Chased us away, till, raising of more aid, We came again to bind them. Then they fled Into this abbey, whither we pursued them, And here the Abbess shuts the gates on us And will not suffer us to fetch him out, Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence. Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.
Long since thy husband served me in my wars, And I to thee engaged a prince’s word, When thou didst make him master of thy bed, To do him all the grace and good I could. Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate, And bid the Lady Abbess come to me. I will determine this before I stir.
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself. My master and his man are both broke loose, Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor, Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire, And ever as it blazed, they threw on him Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair. My master preaches patience to him, and the while His man with scissors nicks him like a fool; And sure, unless you send some present help, Between them they will kill the conjurer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, fool. Thy master and his man are here,And that is false thou dost report to us.
Mistress, upon my life I tell you true.I have not breathed almost since I did see it.He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,To scorch your face and to disfigure you.
Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, begone!
Come, stand by me. Fear nothing.—Guard with halberds.
Ay me, it is my husband. Witness youThat he is borne about invisible.Even now we housed him in the abbey here,And now he’s there, past thought of human reason.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Justice, most gracious duke, O, grant me justice, Even for the service that long since I did thee When I bestrid thee in the wars and took Deep scars to save thy life. Even for the blood That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
[aside] Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there, She whom thou gav’st to me to be my wife, That hath abusèd and dishonored me Even in the strength and height of injury. Beyond imagination is the wrong That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon meWhile she with harlots feasted in my house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A grievous fault.—Say, woman, didst thou so?
No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sisterToday did dine together. So befall my soulAs this is false he burdens me withal.
Ne'er may I look on day, nor sleep on nightBut she tells to your Highness simple truth.
O perjured woman! —They are both forsworn.In this the madman justly chargeth them.
My liege, I am advisèd what I say, Neither disturbed with the effect of wine, Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad. This woman locked me out this day from dinner. That goldsmith there, were he not packed with her, Could witness it, for he was with me then, Who parted with me to go fetch a chain, Promising to bring it to the Porpentine, Where Balthasar and I did dine together. Our dinner done and he not coming thither, I went to seek him. In the street I met him, And in his company that gentleman. [points to the SECOND MERCHANT ] There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down That I this day of him received the chain, Which, God he knows, I saw not; for the which He did arrest me with an officer. I did obey, and sent my peasant home For certain ducats. He with none returned. Then fairly I bespoke the officer To go in person with me to my house. By th' way we met My wife, her sister, and a rabble more Of vile confederates. Along with them They brought one Pinch, a hungry, lean-faced villain, A mere anatomy, a mountebank, A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller, A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, A living dead man. This pernicious slave, Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer, And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse, And with no face (as ’twere) outfacing me, Cries out I was possessed. Then all together They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence, And in a dark and dankish vault at home There left me and my man, both bound together, Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder, I gained my freedom and immediately Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech To give me ample satisfaction For these deep shames and great indignities.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him:That he dined not at home, but was locked out.
But had he such a chain of thee or no?
He had, my lord, and when he ran in here,These people saw the chain about his neck.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mineHeard you confess you had the chain of himAfter you first forswore it on the mart,And thereupon I drew my sword on you,And then you fled into this abbey here,From whence I think you are come by miracle.
I never came within these abbey walls,Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me.I never saw the chain, so help me heaven,And this is false you burden me withal.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, what an intricate impeach is this!I think you all have drunk of Circe’s cup.If here you housed him, here he would have been.If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly. [to ADRIANA ] You say he dined at home; the goldsmith hereDenies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.
He did, and from my finger snatched that ring.
'Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.
Saw’st thou him enter at the abbey here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As sure, my liege, as I do see your Grace.
Why, this is strange.—Go call the Abbess hither.I think you are all mated or stark mad.
Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word.Haply I see a friend will save my lifeAnd pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
[to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS ] Is not your name, sir, calledAntipholus?And is not that your bondman Dromio?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Within this hour I was his bondman sir,But he, I thank him, gnawed in two my cords.Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.
I am sure you both of you remember me.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you.For lately we were bound as you are now.You are not Pinch’s patient, are you, sir?
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
I never saw you in my life till now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, grief hath changed me since you saw me last,And careful hours with time’s deformèd handHave written strange defeatures in my face.But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
Neither.
Dromio, nor thou?
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
I am sure thou dost.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
Not know my voice! O time’s extremity, Hast thou so crack’d and splitted my poor tongue In seven short years that here my only son Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares? Though now this grainèd face of mine be hid In sap-consuming winter’s drizzled snow, And all the conduits of my blood froze up, Yet hath my night of life some memory, My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left, My dull deaf ears a little use to hear. All these old witnesses—I cannot err— Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
I never saw my father in my life.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,Thou know’st we parted. But perhaps, my son,Thou sham’st to acknowledge me in misery.
The Duke and all that know me in the cityCan witness with me that it is not soI ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty yearsHave I been patron to Antipholus,During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa.I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
[looks at the ANTIPHOLUS tw ins] One of these men is genius to the other. [looks at the DROMIO tw ins] And so, of these, which is the natural manAnd which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
I, sir, am Dromio. Command him away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I, sir, am Dromio. Please, let me stay.
Egeon art thou not, or else his ghost?
O, my old master.—Who hath bound him here?
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds And gain a husband by his liberty.— Speak, old Egeon, if thou be’st the man That hadst a wife once called Emilia, That bore thee at a burden two fair sons. O, if thou be’st the same Egeon, speak, And speak unto the same Emilia.
Why, here begins his morning story right; These two Antipholuses, these two so like, And these two Dromios, one in semblance— Besides his urging of her wreck at sea— These are the parents to these children, Which accidentally are met together.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I dream not, thou art Emilia.If thou art she, tell me where is that sonThat floated with thee on the fatal raft?
By men of Epidamnum he and I And the twin Dromio all were taken up; But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth By force took Dromio and my son from them And me they left with those of Epidamnum. What then became of them I cannot tell; I to this fortune that you see me in.
[to ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE ] Antipholus, thou cam’st fromCorinth first.
No, sir, not I. I came from Syracuse.
Stay, stand apart. I know not which is which.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.
And I with him.
Brought to this town by that most famous warriorDuke Menaphon, your most renownèd uncle.
Which of you two did dine with me today?
I, gentle mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And are not you my husband?
No, I say nay to that.
And so do I, yet did she call me so,And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,Did call me brother. [t o LUCIANA ] What I told you thenI hope I shall have leisure to make good,If this be not a dream I see and hear.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
I think it be, sir. I deny it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
I think I did, sir. I deny it not.
I sent you money, sir, to be your bailBy Dromio, but I think he brought it not.
No, none by me.
This purse of ducats I received from you, And Dromio my man did bring them me. I see we still did meet each other’s man, And I was ta'en for him, and he for me, And thereupon these errors are arose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]These ducats pawn I for my father here.
It shall not need. Thy father hath his life.
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.
There, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.
Renownèd duke, vouchsafe to take the pains To go with us into the abbey here And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes, And all that are assembled in this place That by this sympathizèd one day’s error Have suffered wrong. Go, keep us company, And we shall make full satisfaction.— Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail Of you, my sons, and till this present hour My heavy burden ne'er deliverèd.— The Duke, my husband, and my children both, And you, the calendars of their nativity, Go to a gossips' feast, and go with me. After so long grief, such nativity!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With all my heart I’ll gossip at this feast.
[to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS ] Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked?
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
He speaks to me.—I am your master, Dromio.Come, go with us. We’ll look to that anon.Embrace thy brother there. Rejoice with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is a fat friend at your master’s houseThat kitchened me for you today at dinner.She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother:I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
Not I, sir. You are my elder.
That’s a question. How shall we try it?
We’ll draw cuts for the signior. Till then, lead thou first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, then, thus:We came into the world like brother and brother,And now let’s go hand in hand, not one before another.
In sooth, I know not why I am so sad. It wearies me; you say it wearies you. But how I caught it, found it, or came by it, What stuff ’tis made of, whereof it is born, I am to learn. And such a want-wit sadness makes of me, That I have much ado to know myself.
Your mind is tossing on the ocean, There, where your argosies with portly sail, Like signors and rich burghers on the flood— Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea— Do overpeer the petty traffickers That curtsy to them, do them reverence As they fly by them with their woven wings.
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth, The better part of my affections would Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind, Peering in maps for ports and piers and roads. And every object that might make me fear Misfortune to my ventures out of doubt Would make me sad.
My wind cooling my broth Would blow me to an ague when I thought What harm a wind too great at sea might do. I should not see the sandy hourglass run, But I should think of shallows and of flats And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand, Vailing her high top lower than her ribs To kiss her burial. Should I go to church And see the holy edifice of stone And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, Which, touching but my gentle vessel’s side, Would scatter all her spices on the stream, Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, And, in a word, but even now worth this, And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought To think on this, and shall I lack the thought That such a thing bechanced would make me sad? But tell not me. I know Antonio Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it— My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, Nor to one place, nor is my whole estate Upon the fortune of this present year. Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
Why then, you are in love.
Fie, fie!
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad Because you are not merry— and ’twere as easy For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus, Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time. Some that will evermore peep through their eyes And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper, And other of such vinegar aspect That they’ll not show their teeth in way of smile Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare ye well.We leave you now with better company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would have stayed till I had made you merryIf worthier friends had not prevented me.
Your worth is very dear in my regard.I take it your own business calls on youAnd you embrace th' occasion to depart.
[to BASSANIO, LORENZO, GRATIANO] Good morrow, my good lords.
[to SALERIO and SOLANIO] Good signors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when?You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?
We’ll make our leisures to attend on yours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio, We two will leave you. But at dinnertimeI pray you have in mind where we must meet.
I will not fail you.
You look not well, Signor Antonio. You have too much respect upon the world. They lose it that do buy it with much care. Believe me, you are marvelously changed.
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano—A stage where every man must play a part,And mine a sad one.
Let me play the fool. With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come. And let my liver rather heat with wine Than my heart cool with mortifying groans. Why should a man whose blood is warm within Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster, Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio— I love thee, and ’tis my love that speaks— There are a sort of men whose visages Do cream and mantle like a standing pond, And do a willful stillness entertain With purpose to be dressed in an opinion Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, As who should say, “I am Sir Oracle, And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark!” O my Antonio, I do know of these That therefore only are reputed wise For saying nothing, when I am very sure If they should speak, would almost damn those ears Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools. I’ll tell thee more of this another time. But fish not with this melancholy bait For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.— Come, good Lorenzo.—Fare ye well awhile. I’ll end my exhortation after dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, we will leave you then till dinnertime. I must be one of these same dumb wise men, For Gratiano never lets me speak.
Well, keep me company but two years more,Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
Farewell. I’ll grow a talker for this gear.
Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendableIn a neat’s tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
Is that any thing now?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff —you shall seek all dayere you find them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.
Well, tell me now what lady is the same To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,That you today promised to tell me of?
'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio, How much I have disabled mine estate, By something showing a more swelling port Than my faint means would grant continuance. Nor do I now make moan to be abridged From such a noble rate. But my chief care Is to come fairly off from the great debts Wherein my time something too prodigal Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio, I owe the most in money and in love, And from your love I have a warranty To unburden all my plots and purposes How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it. And if it stand, as you yourself still do, Within the eye of honor, be assured My purse, my person, my extremest means Lie all unlocked to your occasions.
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft, I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight The selfsame way with more advisèd watch To find the other forth— and by adventuring both, I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof Because what follows is pure innocence. I owe you much, and, like a willful youth, That which I owe is lost. But if you please To shoot another arrow that self way Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt, As I will watch the aim, or to find both Or bring your latter hazard back again And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You know me well, and herein spend but time To wind about my love with circumstance. And out of doubt you do me now more wrong In making question of my uttermost Than if you had made waste of all I have. Then do but say to me what I should do That in your knowledge may by me be done, And I am pressed unto it. Therefore speak.
In Belmont is a lady richly left, And she is fair and—fairer than that word— Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes I did receive fair speechless messages. Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued To Cato’s daughter, Brutus' Portia. Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, For the four winds blow in from every coast Renownèd suitors, and her sunny locks Hang on her temples like a golden fleece, Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strand, And many Jasons come in quest of her. O my Antonio, had I but the means To hold a rival place with one of them, I have a mind presages me such thrift That I should questionless be fortunate!
Thou know’st that all my fortunes are at sea. Neither have I money nor commodity To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth, Try what my credit can in Venice do— That shall be racked even to the uttermost To furnish thee to Belmont, to fair Portia. Go presently inquire, and so will I, Where money is, and I no question make To have it of my trust or for my sake.
By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.
You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in thesame abundance as your good fortunes are. And yet for aught I see, they are as sick that surfeit with too muchas they that starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. Superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good sentences, and well pronounced.
They would be better if well followed.
If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men’s cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions. I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than be one of the twenty to follow mineown teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. Such a hare is madness the youth—to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband. O me, the word “choose!”I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike—so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, thatI cannot choose one nor refuse none?
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good inspirations. Therefore the lottery thathe hath devised in these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one whoshall rightly love. But what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these princely suitors that arealready come?
I pray thee, overname them. And as thou namest them, I will describe them. And according to my description, level at my affection.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
Ay, that’s a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talkof his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoe him himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith.
Then there is the County Palatine.
He doth nothing but frown, as who should say, “An you will not have me, choose.” He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the weeping philosopherwhen he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married to a death’s-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these. God defend me from these two!
How say you by the French lord, Monsieur le Bon?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God made him and therefore let him pass for a man. In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he!— why, he hath a horse better than the Neapolitan’s, a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine. He is every man in no man. If a throstle sing, he falls straight a- capering. He will fence with his own shadow.If I should marry him, I should marry twenty husbands. If he would despise me I would forgive him, for if he love me to madness I shall never requite him.
What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron ofEngland?
You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him. He hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the court and swear thatI have a poor pennyworth in the English. He is a properman’s picture, but alas, who can converse with a dumb show? How oddly he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany, and his behavior everywhere.
What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbor?
That he hath a neighborly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman and swore hewould pay him again when he was able. I think the Frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony’s nephew?
Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober, and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk. When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and when he is worst he is little better than a beast. And the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.
If he should offer to choose and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father’s will if you should refuse to accept him.
Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing, Nerissa, ere I’ll be married to a sponge.
You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. They have acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their home and to trouble you with no more suit unless you may be won by some other sort than your father’s imposition depending on the caskets.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chasteas Diana unless I be obtained by the manner of my father’s will. I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence. And I pray God grant them a fair departure.
Do you not remember, lady, in your father’s time a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of the Marquess of Montferrat?
Yes, yes, it was Bassanio—as I think he was so called.
True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, what news?
The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. And there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings word the prince his masterwill be here tonight.
If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good a heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach. If he have the condition of a saint andthe complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me. Come, Nerissa.— [to SERVANT] Sirrah, go before. Whiles we shut the gates upon one wooer Another knocks at the door.
Three thousand ducats, well.
Ay, sir, for three months.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For three months, well.
For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
Antonio shall become bound, well.
May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer?
Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your answer to that?
Antonio is a good man.
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
Ho, no, no, no, no. My meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition. He hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies. I understand moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures he hath squandered abroad. But ships are but boards, sailors butmen. There be land rats and water rats, water thieves and land thieves—I mean pirates—and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is notwithstanding sufficient.
Be assured you may.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will be assured I may, and that I may be assured,I will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio?
If it please you to dine with us.
Yes—to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into. I will buywith you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?
This is Signor Antonio.
[aside] How like a fawning publican he looks! I hate him for he is a Christian, But more for that in low simplicity He lends out money gratis and brings down The rate of usance here with us in Venice. If I can catch him once upon the hip, I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him. He hates our sacred nation, and he rails, Even there where merchants most do congregate, On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift, Which he calls “interest.” Cursèd be my tribe If I forgive him!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shylock, do you hear?
I am debating of my present store, And by the near guess of my memory I cannot instantly raise up the gross Of full three thousand ducats. What of that? Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe, Will furnish me. But soft! How many months Do you desire? [to ANTONIO] Rest you fair, good signor. Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow By taking nor by giving of excess, Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend, I’ll break a custom. [to BASSANIO] Is he yet possessed How much ye would?
Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.
And for three months.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I had forgot—three months. [to BASSANIO] You told me so. [to ANTONIO] Well then, your bond, and let me see—But hear you, Methought you said you neither lend nor borrowUpon advantage.
I do never use it.
When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban’s sheep— This Jacob from our holy Abram was, As his wise mother wrought in his behalf, The third possessor, ay, he was the third—
And what of him? Did he take interest?
No, not take interest—not as you would say Directly interest. Mark what Jacob did: When Laban and himself were compromised That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied Should fall as Jacob’s hire, the ewes, being rank, In the end of autumn turnèd to the rams. And when the work of generation was Between these woolly breeders in the act, The skillful shepherd peeled me certain wands. And in the doing of the deed of kind He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, Who then conceiving did in weaning time Fall parti-colored lambs—and those were Jacob’s. This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed. And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for— A thing not in his power to bring to pass But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven. Was this inserted to make interest good? Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
I cannot tell: I make it breed as fast.But note me, signor—
Mark you this, Bassanio, The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. An evil soul producing holy witness Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten at the heart. Oh, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!
Three thousand ducats—’tis a good round sum. Three months from twelve, then. Let me see. The rate—
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Signor Antonio, many a time and oft In the Rialto you have rated me About my moneys and my usances. Still have I borne it with a patient shrug, For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog, And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine— And all for use of that which is mine own. Well then, it now appears you need my help. Go to, then! You come to me and you say, “Shylock, we would have moneys.” You say so!— You, that did void your rheum upon my beard And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur Over your threshold! Moneys is your suit. What should I say to you? Should I not say, “Hath a dog money? Is it possible A cur can lend three thousand ducats?” Or Shall I bend low and in a bondman’s key With bated breath and whispering humbleness Say this: “Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last; You spurned me such a day; another time You called me ’dog'—and for these courtesies I’ll lend you thus much moneys?”
I am as like to call thee so again, To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too. If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not As to thy friends, for when did friendship take A breed for barren metal of his friend? But lend it rather to thine enemy, Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face Exact the penalty.
Why, look you how you storm! I would be friends with you and have your love, Forget the shames that you have stained me with, Supply your present wants and take no doit Of usance for my moneys—and you’ll not hear me! This is kind I offer.
This were kindness.
This kindness will I show. Go with me to a notary, seal me there Your single bond, and—in a merry sport— If you repay me not on such a day, In such a place, such sum or sums as are Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit Be nominated for an equal pound Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken In what part of your body pleaseth me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Content, in faith. I’ll seal to such a bond,And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me!I’ll rather dwell in my necessity.
Why, fear not, man. I will not forfeit it. Within these two months—that’s a month before This bond expires—I do expect return Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
O Father Abram, what these Christians are, Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect The thoughts of others!— Pray you, tell me this: If he should break his day, what should I gain By the exaction of the forfeiture? A pound of man’s flesh taken from a man Is not so estimable, profitable neither, As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say, To buy his favor I extend this friendship. If he will take it, so. If not, adieu. And for my love I pray you wrong me not.
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then meet me forthwith at the notary’s. Give him direction for this merry bond, And I will go and purse the ducats straight, See to my house left in the fearful guard Of an unthrifty knave, and presently I will be with you.
Hie thee, gentle Jew.
The Hebrew will turn Christian. He grows kind.
I like not fair terms and a villain’s mind.
Come on. In this there can be no dismay.My ships come home a month before the day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mislike me not for my complexion, The shadowed livery of the burnished sun, To whom I am a neighbor and near bred. Bring me the fairest creature northward born, Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, And let us make incision for your love To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine Hath feared the valiant. By my love I swear The best-regarded virgins of our clime Have loved it too. I would not change this hue Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
In terms of choice I am not solely led By nice direction of a maiden’s eyes. Besides, the lottery of my destiny Bars me the right of voluntary choosing. But if my father had not scanted me And hedged me by his wit to yield myself His wife who wins me by that means I told you, Yourself, renownèd Prince, then stood as fair As any comer I have looked on yet For my affection.
Even for that I thank you. Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets To try my fortune. By this scimitar That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince That won three fields of Sultan Solyman, I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look, Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey, To win the lady. But, alas the while! If Hercules and Lychas play at dice Which is the better man, the greater throw May turn by fortune from the weaker hand. So is Alcides beaten by his page, And so may I, blind fortune leading me, Miss that which one unworthier may attain And die with grieving.
You must take your chance, And either not attempt to choose at all Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong Never to speak to lady afterward In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]First, forward to the temple. After dinnerYour hazard shall be made.
Good fortune then!—To make me blessed or cursed’st among men.
Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew, my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me, “Gobbo,” “Launcelot Gobbo,” “Good Launcelot,” or “Good Gobbo,” or “Good Launcelot Gobbo” —“use your legs, take the start, run away.” My conscience says, “No. Take heed, honest Launcelot. Take heed, honest Gobbo,” or as aforesaid, “Honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not run. Scorn running with thy heels.” Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. “Fia!” says the fiend. “Away!” says the fiend. “For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,” says the fiend, “and run.” Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me, “My honest friend Launcelot, being anhonest man’s son”—or rather an honest woman’s son, for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to.He had a kind of taste.—Well, my conscience says, “Launcelot, budge not.” “Budge!” says the fiend. “Budge not,” says my conscience. “Conscience,” say I, “you counsel well.” “Fiend,” say I, “you counsel well.” To beruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jew my master, who, God bless the mark, is a kind of devil. Andto run away from the Jew I should be ruled by the fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself.Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation. And inmy conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew.The fiend gives the more friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at your command. I will run.
Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way toMaster Jew’s?
[aside] O heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who, being more than sand-blind—high-gravel blind—knows me not. I will try confusions with him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way toMaster Jew’s?
Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning of all on your left. Marry, at the verynext turning turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew’s house.
By God’s sonties, ’twill be a hard way to hit. Can you tell me whether one Launcelot that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?
Talk you of young Master Launcelot? [aside] Mark me now. Now will I raise the waters.—Talk you of young Master Launcelot?
No “master,” sir, but a poor man’s son. His father, though I say ’t, is an honest exceeding poor man and, God be thanked, well to live.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, let his father be what he will, we talk of youngMaster Launcelot.
Your worship’s friend and Launcelot, sir.
But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk you of young Master Launcelot?
Of Launcelot, an ’t please your mastership.
Ergo, Master Launcelot. Talk not of Master Launcelot, Father, for the young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies and such odd sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as youwould say in plain terms, gone to heaven.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.
Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop?Do you know me, Father?
Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman. But I pray you, tell me, is my boy, God rest his soul, alive or dead?
Do you not know me, Father?
Alack, sir, I am sand-blind. I know you not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, indeed if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me. It is a wise father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you news of your son. Give me your blessing. Truth will come to light. Murder cannot be hid long—a man’s son may, but in the end truthwill out.
Pray you, sir, stand up. I am sure you are not Launcelot, my boy.
Pray you, let’s have no more fooling about it, but giveme your blessing. I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be.
I cannot think you are my son.
I know not what I shall think of that. But I am Launcelot, the Jew’s man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her name is Margery, indeed. I’ll be sworn, if thou beLauncelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. [feels the back of LAUNCELOT’s head] Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
It should seem then that Dobbin’s tail grows backward.I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I last saw him.
Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou and thy master agree? I have brought him a present. How 'gree you now?
Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground. My master’s a very Jew. Give him a present.Give him a halter. I am famished in his service. You may tell every finger I have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come. Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries. If I servenot him, I will run as far as God has any ground.—O rare fortune! Here comes the man.—To him, Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.
[to a follower] You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To him, Father.
[to BASSANIO] God bless your worship!
Gramercy! Wouldst thou aught with me?
Here’s my son, sir, a poor boy—
Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew’s man that would,sir, as my father shall specify—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve—
Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew and have a desire, as my father shall specify—
His master and he, saving your worship’s reverence, are scarce cater-cousins—
To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being, I hope, an old man, shall frutify unto you—
I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and my suit is—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall know by this honest old man—and though I say it, though old man, yet poor man, my father—
One speak for both. What would you?
Serve you, sir.
That is the very defect of the matter, sir.
I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit. Shylock thy master spoke with me this day, And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment To leave a rich Jew’s service, to become The follower of so poor a gentleman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you, sir—you have “the grace of God,” sir, and he hath “enough.”
Thou speak’st it well.—Go, father, with thy son.— Take leave of thy old master and inquire My lodging out.— [to followers] Give him a livery More guarded than his fellows'. See it done.
Father, in. I cannot get a service, no. I have ne'er a tongue in my head. [reading his own palm] Well, if any man in Italy have afairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune. Go to, here’s a simple line of life. Here’s a small trifle of wives. Alas, fifteen wives is nothing! Eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man. And then to ’scape drowning thrice and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed—here are simple ’scapes. Well, if Fortune be a woman, she’s a good wench for this gear.—Father, come. I’ll take my leave of the Jew in thetwinkling.
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this. These things being bought and orderly bestowed, Return in haste, for I do feast tonight My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.
My best endeavours shall be done herein.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LEONARDO] Where is your master?
Yonder, sir, he walks.
Signor Bassanio!
Gratiano!
I have a suit to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have obtained it.
You must not deny me. I must go with you to Belmont.
Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano. Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice— Parts that become thee happily enough And in such eyes as ours appear not faults. But where thou art not known, why, there they show Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain To allay with some cold drops of modesty Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior I be misconst’red in the place I go to, And lose my hopes.
Signor Bassanio, hear me. If I do not put on a sober habit, Talk with respect and swear but now and then, Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely— Nay more. While grace is saying, hood mine eyes Thus with my hat, and sigh and say, “Amen”— Use all the observance of civility Like one well studied in a sad ostent To please his grandam, never trust me more.
Well, we shall see your bearing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge meBy what we do tonight.
No, that were pity. I would entreat you rather to put on Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends That purpose merriment. But fare you well. I have some business.
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest.But we will visit you at supper time.
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee. And Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see Lorenzo, who is thy new master’s guest. Give him this letter. [gives LAUNCELOT a letter] Do it secretly. And so farewell. I would not have my father See me in talk with thee.
Adieu! Tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave andget thee, I am much deceived. But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit. Adieu.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, good Launcelot.
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me To be ashamed to be my father’s child! But though I am a daughter to his blood, I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo, If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife, Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,Disguise us at my lodging, and return,All in an hour.
We have not made good preparation.
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered,And better in my mind not undertook.
'Tis now but four o'clock. We have two hoursTo furnish us.
Friend Launcelot, what’s the news?
[giving LORENZO the letter] An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seemto signify.
I know the hand. In faith, ’tis a fair hand,And whiter than the paper it writ onIs the fair hand that writ.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Love news, in faith?
[to LORENZO] By your leave, sir.
Whither goest thou?
Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to sup tonightwith my new master the Christian.
[giving LAUNCELOT money] Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica I will not fail her. Speak it privately.— Go, gentlemen, Will you prepare you for this masque tonight? I am provided of a torchbearer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, marry, I’ll be gone about it straight.
And so will I.
Meet me and GratianoAt Gratiano’s lodging some hour hence.
'Tis good we do so.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed How I shall take her from her father’s house, What gold and jewels she is furnished with, What page’s suit she hath in readiness. If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven, It will be for his gentle daughter’s sake. And never dare Misfortune cross her foot Unless she do it under this excuse: That she is issue to a faithless Jew. Come, go with me. [gives GRATIANO the letter] Peruse this as thou goest. Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.— What, Jessica!— Thou shalt not gormandize As thou hast done with me.— What, Jessica!— And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out— Why, Jessica, I say!
Why, Jessica!
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
Your worship was wont to tell me that I could do nothing without bidding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call you? What is your will?
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica. There are my keys.— But wherefore should I go? I am not bid for love. They flatter me. But yet I’ll go in hate to feed upon The prodigal Christian.— Jessica, my girl, Look to my house. I am right loath to go. There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, For I did dream of money bags tonight.
I beseech you, sir, go. My young master doth expect your reproach.
So do I his.
And they have conspired together. I will not say you shall see a masque, but if you do then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o'clock i' th' morning falling out that yearon Ash Wednesday was four year in th' afternoon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica. Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife, Clamber not you up to the casements then, Nor thrust your head into the public street To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces. But stop my house’s ears—I mean my casements— Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter My sober house. By Jacob’s staff, I swear, I have no mind of feasting forth tonight. But I will go.—Go you before me, sirrah. Say I will come.
I will go before, sir.— Mistress, look out at window, for all this. There will come a Christian by Will be worth a Jewess' eye.
What says that fool of Hagar’s offspring, ha?
His words were, “Farewell, mistress.” Nothing else.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day More than the wildcat. Drones hive not with me. Therefore I part with him, and part with him To one that would have him help to waste His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in. Perhaps I will return immediately. Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you. Fast bind, fast find. A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost, I have a father, you a daughter, lost.
This is the penthouse under which LorenzoDesired us to make stand.
His hour is almost past.
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour,For lovers ever run before the clock.
Oh, ten times faster Venus' pigeons flyTo seal love’s bonds new made than they are wontTo keep obligèd faith unforfeited.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast With that keen appetite that he sits down? Where is the horse that doth untread again His tedious measures with the unbated fire That he did pace them first? All things that are, Are with more spirit chasèd than enjoyed. How like a younger or a prodigal The scarfèd bark puts from her native bay, Hugged and embraèd by the strumpet wind! How like the prodigal doth she return, With overweathered ribs and ragged sails Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!
Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode. Not I but my affairs have made you wait. When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, I’ll watch as long for you then. Approach. Here dwells my father Jew.—Ho! Who’s within?
Who are you? Tell me for more certainty,Albeit I’ll swear that I do know your tongue.
Lorenzo, and thy love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed— For who love I so much? And now who knowsBut you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
Here, catch this casket. It is worth the pains. I am glad ’tis night, you do not look on me, For I am much ashamed of my exchange. But love is blind, and lovers cannot see The pretty follies that themselves commit, For if they could Cupid himself would blush To see me thus transformèd to a boy.
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.
What, must I hold a candle to my shames? They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light. Why, ’tis an office of discovery, love. And I should be obscured.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So are you, sweet, Even in the lovely garnish of a boy. But come at once, For the close night doth play the runaway, And we are stayed for at Bassanio’s feast.
I will make fast the doors and gild myself With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew.
Beshrew me but I love her heartily. For she is wise, if I can judge of her. And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true. And true she is, as she hath proved herself. And therefore, like herself—wise, fair and true— Shall she be placèd in my constant soul.
What, art thou come?—On, gentlemen, away!Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who’s there?
Signor Antonio?
Fie, fie, Gratiano! Where are all the rest? 'Tis nine o'clock. Our friends all stay for you. No masque tonight. The wind is come about. Bassanio presently will go aboard. I have sent twenty out to seek for you.
I am glad on ’t. I desire no more delightThan to be under sail and gone tonight.
[to servant[ Go draw aside the curtains and discoverThe several caskets to this noble prince.— [A curtain is drawn showing a gold, silver, and lead casket] [to MOROCCO] Now make your choice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The first, of gold, who this inscription bears: “Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.” The second, silver, which this promise carries: “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt: “Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.” How shall I know if I do choose the right?
The one of them contains my picture, Prince.If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see. I will survey th' inscriptions back again. What says this leaden casket? “Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.” Must give—for what? For lead? Hazard for lead? This casket threatens . Men that hazard all Do it in hope of fair advantages. A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. I’ll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. What says the silver with her virgin hue? “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” “As much as he deserves!”—pause there, Morocco, And weigh thy value with an even hand. If thou beest rated by thy estimation, Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough May not extend so far as to the lady, And yet to be afeard of my deserving Were but a weak disabling of myself. As much as I deserve! Why, that’s the lady. I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes, In graces, and in qualities of breeding. But more than these, in love I do deserve. What if I strayed no further, but chose here? Let’s see once more this saying graved in gold, “Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.” Why, that’s the lady. All the world desires her. From the four corners of the earth they come To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint. The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds Of wide Arabia are as thoroughfares now For princes to come view fair Portia. The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar To stop the foreign spirits, but they come As o'er a brook to see fair Portia. One of these three contains her heavenly picture. Is ’t like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation To think so base a thought. It were too gross To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave. Or shall I think in silver she’s immured, Being ten times undervalued to tried gold? O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem Was set in worse than gold. They have in England A coin that bears the figure of an angel Stamped in gold, but that’s insculped upon. But here an angel in a golden bed Lies all within.— Deliver me the key. Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!
[giving MOROCCO a key] There, take it, Prince. And if my form lie thereThen I am yours.
O hell, what have we here? A carrion death, within whose empty eye There is a written scroll. I’ll read the writing. [reads] “All that glisters is not gold— Often have you heard that told. Many a man his life hath sold But my outside to behold. Gilded tombs do worms enfold. Had you been as wise as bold, Young in limbs, in judgment old, Your answer had not been inscrolled. Fare you well. Your suit is cold— Cold, indeed, and labor lost.” Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A gentle riddance.—Draw the curtains, go.—Let all of his complexion choose me so.
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail.With him is Gratiano gone along.And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke, Who went with him to search Bassanio’s ship.
He came too late. The ship was under sail. But there the Duke was given to understand That in a gondola were seen together Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica. Besides, Antonio certified the Duke They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
I never heard a passion so confused, So strange, outrageous, and so variable, As the dog Jew did utter in the streets . “My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter, Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats! Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter! A sealèd bag, two sealèd bags of ducats, Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! And jewels—two stones, two rich and precious stones— Stol'n by my daughter! Justice, find the girl! She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,Crying, “His stones, his daughter, and his ducats!”
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,Or he shall pay for this.
Marry, well remembered. I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday, Who told me, in the narrow seas that part The French and English, there miscarried A vessel of our country richly fraught. I thought upon Antonio when he told me, And wished in silence that it were not his.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear—Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
A kinder gentleman treads not the earth. I saw Bassanio and Antonio part. Bassanio told him he would make some speed Of his return. He answered, “Do not so. Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio But stay the very riping of the time. And for the Jew’s bond which he hath of me, Let it not enter in your mind of love. Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts To courtship and such fair ostents of love As shall conveniently become you there.” And even there, his eye being big with tears, Turning his face, he put his hand behind him, And with affection wondrous sensible He wrung Bassanio’s hand. And so they parted.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think he only loves the world for him. I pray thee, let us go and find him out And quicken his embracèd heaviness With some delight or other.
Do we so.
Quick, quick, I pray thee. Draw the curtain straight.The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oathAnd comes to his election presently.
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince. If you choose that wherein I am contained, Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized. But if you fail, without more speech, my lord, You must be gone from hence immediately.
I am enjoined by oath to observe three things: First, never to unfold to any one Which casket ’twas I chose; next, if I fail Of the right casket, never in my life To woo a maid in way of marriage; lastly, If I do fail in fortune of my choice, Immediately to leave you and be gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To these injunctions every one doth swearThat comes to hazard for my worthless self.
And so have I addressed me. Fortune now To my heart’s hope! Gold, silver, and base lead. “Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.” You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard. What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see. “Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.” “What many men desire”—that “many” may be meant By the fool multitude that choose by show, Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet Builds in the weather on the outward wall, Even in the force and road of casualty. I will not choose what many men desire Because I will not jump with common spirits And rank me with the barbarous multitudes. Why then, to thee, thou silver treasure house. Tell me once more what title thou dost bear. “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” And well said too—for who shall go about To cozen fortune and be honorable Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume To wear an undeservèd dignity. Oh, that estates, degrees and offices Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor Were purchased by the merit of the wearer! How many then should cover that stand bare! How many be commanded that command! How much low peasantry would then be gleaned From the true seed of honor! And how much honor Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times To be new varnished! Well, but to my choice. “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” I will assume desert.—Give me a key for this, And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
Too long a pause for that which you find there.
What’s here? The portrait of a blinking idiot Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.— How much unlike art thou to Portia! How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! “Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves”! Did I deserve no more than a fool’s head? Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?
To offend and judge are distinct officesAnd of opposèd natures.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is here? [reads] “The fire seven times tried this, Seven times tried that judgment is, That did never choose amiss. Some there be that shadows kiss. Such have but a shadow’s bliss. There be fools alive, iwis, Silvered o'er—and so was this. Take what wife you will to bed, I will ever be your head. So be gone. You are sped. Still more fool I shall appear” By the time I linger here. With one fool’s head I came to woo, But I go away with two.— Sweet, adieu. I’ll keep my oath Patiently to bear my wroth.”
Thus hath the candle singed the moth.O these deliberate fools! When they do choose, They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
The ancient saying is no heresy.Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.
Where is my lady?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here. What would my lord?
Madam, there is alighted at your gate A young Venetian, one that comes before To signify th' approaching of his lord, From whom he bringeth sensible regreets, To wit—besides commends and courteous breath— Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen So likely an ambassador of love. A day in April never came so sweet To show how costly summer was at hand, As this forespurrer comes before his lord.
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, Thou spend’st such high-day wit in praising him.— Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see Quick Cupid’s post that comes so mannerly.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!
Now, what news on the Rialto?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas. The Goodwins I think they call the place—a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall shiplie buried, as they say, if my gossip report be an honest woman of her word.
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the honest Antonio—oh, that I had a title good enough to keep his name company!—
Come, the full stop.
Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is he hath lost a ship.
I would it might prove the end of his losses.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me say “Amen” betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
You knew—none so well, none so well as you—of my daughter’s flight.
That’s certain. I, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal.
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is damned for it.
That’s certain—if the devil may be her judge.
My own flesh and blood to rebel!
Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?
I say my daughter is my flesh and blood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish. But tell us,do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at sea orno?
There I have another bad match!— a bankrupt, a prodigal who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the mart. Let him look to his bond. He was wont to call me usurer; let himlook to his bond. He was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.
Why, I am sure, if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh.What’s that good for?
To bait fish withal. If it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me and hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies—and what’s his reason? Iam a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And ifyou wrong us, shall we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example? Why, revenge. The villainy you teach me I will execute—and it shall go hard but I will betterthe instruction.
[to SOLANIO and SALERIO] Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house and desires to speak with you both.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We have been up and down to seek him.
Here comes another of the tribe. A third cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn Jew.
How now, Tubal? What news from Genoa? Hast thou found my daughter?
I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.
Why, there, there, there, there! A diamond gone cost metwo thousand ducats in Frankfurt—the curse never fell upon our nation till now! I never felt it till now—Two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot and thejewels in her ear! Would she were hearsed at my foot and the ducats in her coffin! No news of them? Why, so. And I know not what’s spent in the search. Why thou, loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so muchto find the thief—and no satisfaction, no revenge. Nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o' my shoulders, nosighs but o' my breathing, no tears but o' my shedding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, other men have ill luck too. Antonio, as I heard inGenoa—
What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?
Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.
I thank God, I thank God! Is ’t true, is ’t true?
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news! Ha, ha,heard in Genoa.
Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, in one nightfourscore ducats.
Thou stickest a dagger in me. I shall never see my goldagain. Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!
There came divers of Antonio’s creditors in my company to Venice that swear he cannot choose but break.
I am very glad of it. I’ll plague him. I’ll torture him. I am glad of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my turquoise. I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.
But Antonio is certainly undone.
Nay, that’s true, that’s very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an officer. Bespeak him a fortnight before.—I will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.— Go, go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good Tubal. At our synagogue, Tubal.
[To BASSANIO] I pray you, tarry. Pause a day or two Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong I lose your company. Therefore forbear awhile. There’s something tells me—but it is not love— I would not lose you, and you know yourself Hate counsels not in such a quality. But lest you should not understand me well— And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought— I would detain you here some month or two Before you venture for me. I could teach you How to choose right, but I am then forsworn. So will I never be. So may you miss me. But if you do, you’ll make me wish a sin, That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes, They have o'erlooked me and divided me. One half of me is yours, the other half yours— Mine own, I would say. But if mine, then yours, And so all yours. Oh, these naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights! And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so. Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I. I speak too long, but ’tis to peize the time, To eke it and to draw it out in length, To stay you from election.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me choose, For as I am, I live upon the rack.
Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confessWhat treason there is mingled with your love.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love. There may as well be amity and life 'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rackWhere men enforcèd do speak anything.
Promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well then, confess and live.
“Confess and love” Had been the very sum of my confession. O happy torment, when my torturer Doth teach me answers for deliverance! But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
Away, then. I am locked in one of them. If you do love me you will find me out.— Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. Let music sound while he doth make his choice. Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end, Fading in music. That the comparison May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream And watery deathbed for him. He may win, And what is music then? Then music is Even as the flourish when true subjects bow To a new-crownèd monarch. Such it is As are those dulcet sounds in break of day That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s ear And summon him to marriage. Now he goes With no less presence but with much more love Than young Alcides, when he did redeem The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy To the sea monster. I stand for sacrifice. The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives, With blearèd visages come forth to view The issue of th' exploit.—Go, Hercules! Live thou, I live. With much, much more dismay I view the fight than thou that makest the fray.
[sings] Tell me where is fancy bred. Or in the heart or in the head? How begot, how nourishèd?
Reply, reply.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] It is engendered in the eyes, With gazing fed, and fancy dies In the cradle where it lies. Let us all ring fancy’s knell I’ll begin it.—Ding, dong, bell.
Ding, dong, bell.
So may the outward shows be least themselves. The world is still deceived with ornament. In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt But, being seasoned with a gracious voice, Obscures the show of evil? In religion, What damnèd error, but some sober brow Will bless it and approve it with a text, Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? There is no vice so simple but assumes Some mark of virtue on his outward parts. How many cowards whose hearts are all as false As stairs of sand wear yet upon their chins The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars, Who, inward searched, have livers white as milk, And these assume but valor’s excrement To render them redoubted. Look on beauty, And you shall see ’tis purchased by the weight, Which therein works a miracle in nature, Making them lightest that wear most of it. So are those crispèd snaky golden locks Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind, Upon supposèd fairness, often known To be the dowry of a second head, The skull that bred them in the sepulcher. Thus ornament is but the guilèd shore To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf Veiling an Indian beauty—in a word, The seeming truth which cunning times put on To entrap the wisest. Therefore then, thou gaudy gold, Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee. Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge 'Tween man and man. But thou, thou meagre lead, Which rather threaten’st than dost promise aught, Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence, And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
[aside] How all the other passions fleet to air, As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, And shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! O love, be moderate. Allay thy ecstasy. In measure rein thy joy. Scant this excess. I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less, For fear I surfeit.
[opening the lead casket] What find I here? Fair Portia’s counterfeit! What demigod Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes? Or whether, riding on the balls of mine, Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips, Parted with sugar breath. So sweet a bar Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs, The painter plays the spider and hath woven A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes— How could he see to do them? Having made one, Methinks it should have power to steal both his And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow In underprizing it, so far this shadow Doth limp behind the substance. Here’s the scroll, The continent and summary of my fortune. [reads] “You that choose not by the view, Chance as fair and choose as true. Since this fortune falls to you, Be content and seek no new. If you be well pleased with this And hold your fortune for your bliss, Turn you where your lady is And claim her with a loving kiss.” A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave, I come by note to give and to receive. Like one of two contending in a prize That thinks he hath done well in people’s eyes, Hearing applause and universal shout, Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt Whether these pearls of praise be his or no— So, thrice fair lady, stand I even so, As doubtful whether what I see be true Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand Such as I am. Though for myself alone I would not be ambitious in my wish To wish myself much better, yet for you I would be trebled twenty times myself— A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich— That only to stand high in your account I might in virtue, beauties, livings, friends Exceed account. But the full sum of me Is sum of something which, to term in gross, Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticèd; Happy in this—she is not yet so old But she may learn. Happier than this— She is not bred so dull but she can learn. Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit Commits itself to yours to be directed As from her lord, her governor, her king. Myself and what is mine to you and yours Is now converted. But now I was the lord Of this fair mansion, master of my servants, Queen o'er myself. And even now, but now, This house, these servants, and this same myself Are yours, my lord’s. I give them with this ring, Which when you part from, lose, or give away, Let it presage the ruin of your love And be my vantage to exclaim on you. [gives BASSANIO a ring]
Madam, you have bereft me of all words. Only my blood speaks to you in my veins. And there is such confusion in my powers As after some oration fairly spoke By a belovèd prince there doth appear Among the buzzing pleasèd multitude, Where every something, being blent together, Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy, Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence. O, then be bold to say Bassanio’s dead!
My lord and lady, it is now our time,That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,To cry, “Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!”
My Lord Bassanio and my gentle lady, I wish you all the joy that you can wish, For I am sure you can wish none from me. And when your honors mean to solemnize The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you Even at that time I may be married too.
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank your lordship, you have got me one. My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours. You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid. You loved, I loved. For intermission No more pertains to me, my lord, than you. Your fortune stood upon the casket there, And so did mine too, as the matter falls. For wooing here until I sweat again, And swearing till my very roof was dry With oaths of love, at last—if promise last— I got a promise of this fair one here To have her love, provided that your fortune Achieved her mistress.
Is this true, Nerissa?
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
Yes, faith, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.
[to NERISSA] We’ll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.
What, and stake down?
No, we shall ne'er win at that sport and stake down. But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel? What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither, If that the youth of my new interest here Have power to bid you welcome. [to PORTIA] By your leave, I bid my very friends and countrymen, Sweet Portia, welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So do I, my lord.They are entirely welcome.
[to BASSANIO] I thank your honor. For my part, my lord, My purpose was not to have seen you here. But meeting with Salerio by the way, He did entreat me, past all saying nay, To come with him along.
I did, my lord. And I have reason for it. Signor AntonioCommends him to you. [gives BASSANIO letter]
Ere I ope his letter,I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there Will show you his estate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][indicating JESSICA] Nerissa, cheer yond stranger. Bid her welcome.— Your hand, Salerio. What’s the news from Venice? How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio? I know he will be glad of our success. We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper That steals the color from Bassanio’s cheek. Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world Could turn so much the constitution Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?— With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself, And I must freely have the half of anything That this same paper brings you.
O sweet Portia, Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady, When I did first impart my love to you, I freely told you, all the wealth I had Ran in my veins. I was a gentleman, And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady, Rating myself at nothing, you shall see How much I was a braggart. When I told you My state was nothing, I should then have told you That I was worse than nothing, for indeed I have engaged myself to a dear friend, Engaged my friend to his mere enemy To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady, The paper as the body of my friend, And every word in it a gaping wound, Issuing life blood.— But is it true, Salerio? Have all his ventures failed? What, not one hit? From Tripolis, from Mexico and England, From Lisbon, Barbary, and India? And not one vessel ’scape the dreadful touch Of merchant-marring rocks?
Not one, my lord. Besides, it should appear that if he had The present money to discharge the Jew, He would not take it. Never did I know A creature that did bear the shape of man So keen and greedy to confound a man. He plies the duke at morning and at night, And doth impeach the freedom of the state If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants, The duke himself, and the magnificoes Of greatest port have all persuaded with him. But none can drive him from the envious plea Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When I was with him I have heard him swear To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen, That he would rather have Antonio’s flesh Than twenty times the value of the sum That he did owe him. And I know, my lord, If law, authority, and power deny not, It will go hard with poor Antonio.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man, The best conditioned and unwearied spirit In doing courtesies, and one in whom The ancient Roman honor more appears Than any that draws breath in Italy.
What sum owes he the Jew?
For me, three thousand ducats.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, no more? Pay him six thousand and deface the bond! Double six thousand, and then treble that, Before a friend of this description Shall lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault. First go with me to church and call me wife, And then away to Venice to your friend. For never shall you lie by Portia’s side With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold To pay the petty debt twenty times over. When it is paid, bring your true friend along. My maid Nerissa and myself meantime Will live as maids and widows. Come, away! For you shall hence upon your wedding day. Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer. Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear. But let me hear the letter of your friend.
[reads] “Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried. My creditors grow cruel. My estate is very low. My bond to the Jew is forfeit. And since in paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.”
O love, dispatch all business and be gone!
Since I have your good leave to go away, I will make haste. But till I come again, No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay, No rest be interposer ’twixt us twain.
Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.This is the fool that lent out money gratis.Jailer, look to him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hear me yet, good Shylock.
I’ll have my bond. Speak not against my bond. I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond. Thou calledst me dog before thou hadst a cause. But since I am a dog, beware my fangs. The duke shall grant me justice.—I do wonder, Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond To come abroad with him at his request.
I pray thee, hear me speak.
I’ll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak. I’ll have my bond, and therefore speak no more. I’ll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool To shake the head, relent and sigh, and yield To Christian intercessors. Follow not. I’ll have no speaking. I will have my bond.
It is the most impenetrable curThat ever kept with men.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him alone. I’ll follow him no more with bootless prayers. He seeks my life. His reason well I know. I oft delivered from his forfeitures Many that have at times made moan to me. Therefore he hates me.
I am sure the duke Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
The duke cannot deny the course of law. For the commodity that strangers have With us in Venice, if it be denied, Will much impeach the justice of his state, Since that the trade and profit of the city Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go. These griefs and losses have so bated me, That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.— Well, jailer, on.—Pray God Bassanio come To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence, You have a noble and a true conceit Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly In bearing thus the absence of your lord. But if you knew to whom you show this honor, How true a gentleman you send relief, How dear a lover of my lord your husband, I know you would be prouder of the work Than customary bounty can enforce you.
I never did repent for doing good, Nor shall not now; for in companions That do converse and waste the time together Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love, There must be needs a like proportion Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit, Which makes me think that this Antonio, Being the bosom lover of my lord, Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, How little is the cost I have bestowed In purchasing the semblance of my soul From out the state of hellish cruelty! This comes too near the praising of myself. Therefore no more of it. Hear other things. Lorenzo, I commit into your hands The husbandry and manage of my house Until my lord’s return. For mine own part, I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow To live in prayer and contemplation, Only attended by Nerissa here Until her husband and my lord’s return. There is a monastery two miles off, And there will we abide. I do desire you Not to deny this imposition, The which my love and some necessity Now lays upon you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, with all my heart.I shall obey you in all fair commands.
My people do already know my mind And will acknowledge you and Jessica In place of Lord Bassanio and myself. So fare you well till we shall meet again.
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
I wish your ladyship all heart’s content.
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleasedTo wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Balthazar, As I have ever found thee honest true, So let me find thee still. [gives BALTHAZAR a letter] Take this same letter, And use thou all th' endeavour of a man In speed to Padua. See thou render this Into my cousin’s hands, Doctor Bellario. And look what notes and garments he doth give thee, Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed Unto the traject, to the common ferry Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words, But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in handThat you yet know not of. We’ll see our husbandsBefore they think of us.
Shall they see us?
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit That they shall think we are accomplishèd With that we lack. I’ll hold thee any wager, When we are both accoutred like young men, I’ll prove the prettier fellow of the two, And wear my dagger with the braver grace, And speak between the change of man and boy With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps Into a manly stride, and speak of frays Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, How honorable ladies sought my love, Which I denying, they fell sick and died— I could not do withal!— Then I’ll repent And wish for all that, that I had not killed them. And twenty of these puny lies I’ll tell, That men shall swear I have discontinued school Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks Which I will practice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, shall we turn to men?
Fie, what a question’s that If thou wert near a lewd interpreter! But come, I’ll tell thee all my whole device When I am in my coach, which stays for us At the park gate. And therefore haste away, For we must measure twenty miles today.
Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are tobe laid upon the children. Therefore I promise ye I fear you. I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter. Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is buta kind of bastard hope neither.
And what hope is that, I pray thee?
Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the Jew’s daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That were a kind of bastard hope indeed. So the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.
Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother. Thus when I shun Scylla your father, I fall intoCharybdis your mother. Well, you are gone both ways.
I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made me aChristian.
Truly, the more to blame he. We were Christians eno' before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. This making Christians will raise the price of hogs. If we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly havea rasher on the coals for money.
I’ll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say. Here he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners.
Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Launcelot and I areout. He tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven because I am a Jew’s daughter, and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians you raise the price of pork.
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than youcan the getting up of the Negro’s belly. The Moor is with child by you, Launcelot.
It is much that the Moor should be more than reason. But if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.
How every fool can play upon the word! I think the bestgrace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah. Bid them prepare for dinner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.
Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them prepare dinner.
That is done too, sir. Only “Cover!” is the word.
Will you cover then, sir?
Not so, sir, neither. I know my duty.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet more quarreling with occasion! Wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray thee, understand a plain man in his plain meaning. Go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
For the table, sir, it shall be served in. For the meat, sir, it shall be covered. For your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.
O dear discretion, how his words are suited! The fool hath planted in his memory An army of good words, and I do know A many fools that stand in better place, Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word Defy the matter. How cheerest thou, Jessica? And now, good sweet, say thy opinion. How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio’s wife?
Past all expressing. It is very meet The Lord Bassanio live an upright life, For having such a blessing in his lady, He finds the joys of heaven here on earth. And if on earth he do not merit it, In reason he should never come to heaven. Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match And on the wager lay two earthly women, And Portia one, there must be something else Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world Hath not her fellow.
Even such a husbandHast thou of me as she is for a wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.
No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.Then howsome'er thou speak’st ’mong other thingsI shall digest it.
Well, I’ll set you forth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, is Antonio here?
Ready, so please your grace.
I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch Uncapable of pity, void and empty From any dram of mercy.
I have heard Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify His rigorous course. But since he stands obdurate And that no lawful means can carry me Out of his envy’s reach, I do oppose My patience to his fury, and am armed To suffer with a quietness of spirit The very tyranny and rage of his.
Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.
Make room, and let him stand before our face.— Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too, That thou but lead’st this fashion of thy malice To the last hour of act, and then ’tis thought Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange Than is thy strange apparent cruelty, And where thou now exacts the penalty— Which is a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh— Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture But—touched with human gentleness and love,— Forgive a moiety of the principal, Glancing an eye of pity on his losses That have of late so huddled on his back Eno' to press a royal merchant down And pluck commiseration of his state From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint, From stubborn Turks and Tartars never trained To offices of tender courtesy. We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.
I have possessed your grace of what I purpose, And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn To have the due and forfeit of my bond. If you deny it, let the danger light Upon your charter and your city’s freedom. You’ll ask me why I rather choose to have A weight of carrion flesh than to receive Three thousand ducats. I’ll not answer that But say it is my humour. Is it answered? What if my house be troubled with a rat And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats To have it baned? What, are you answered yet? Some men there are love not a gaping pig, Some that are mad if they behold a cat, And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose, Cannot contain their urine. For affection, Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer: As there is no firm reason to be rendered Why he cannot abide a gaping pig; Why he, a harmless necessary cat; Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force Must yield to such inevitable shame As to offend, himself being offended— So can I give no reason, nor I will not (More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing I bear Antonio), that I follow thus A losing suit against him. Are you answered?
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do all men kill the things they do not love?
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
Every offense is not a hate at first.
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
[to BASSANIO] I pray you, think you question with the Jew? You may as well go stand upon the beach And bid the main flood bate his usual height. You may as well use question with the wolf Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb. You may as well forbid the mountain pines To wag their high tops and to make no noise When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven. You may as well do anything most hard, As seek to soften that—than which what’s harder?— His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you Make no more offers, use no farther means, But with all brief and plain conveniency Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to SHYLOCK] For thy three thousand ducats here is six.
If every ducat in six thousand ducats Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,I would not draw them. I would have my bond.
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong? You have among you many a purchased slave, Which—like your asses and your dogs and mules— You use in abject and in slavish parts Because you bought them. Shall I say to you, “Let them be free! Marry them to your heirs! Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds Be made as soft as yours and let their palates Be seasoned with such viands”? You will answer, “The slaves are ours.” So do I answer you. The pound of flesh which I demand of him Is dearly bought. 'Tis mine and I will have it. If you deny me, fie upon your law— There is no force in the decrees of Venice. I stand for judgment. Answer, shall I have it?
Upon my power I may dismiss this court, Unless Bellario, a learnèd doctor, Whom I have sent for to determine this, Come here today.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, here stays withoutA messenger with letters from the doctor,New come from Padua.
Bring us the letter. Call the messenger.
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all,Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.
I am a tainted wether of the flock, Meetest for death. The weakest kind of fruit Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me. You cannot better be employed, Bassanio, Than to live still and write mine epitaph.
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]From both, my lord. Bellario greets your grace. [gives DUKE a letter]
[to SHYLOCK] Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew, Thou makest thy knife keen. But no metal can— No, not the hangman’s axe—bear half the keenness Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, be thou damned, inexecrable dog, And for thy life let justice be accused! Thou almost makest me waver in my faith To hold opinion with Pythagoras That souls of animals infuse themselves Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter, Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam Infused itself in thee, for thy desires Are wolvish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, Thou but offend’st thy lungs to speak so loud. Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.
This letter from Bellario doth commendA young and learnèd doctor to our court.Where is he?
He attendeth here hard by To know your answer whether you’ll admit him.
With all my heart.—Some three or four of you Go give him courteous conduct to this place.— Meantime the court shall hear Bellario’s letter. [reads] “Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of your letter I am very sick, but in the instant that yourmessenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause in controversy between theJew and Antonio the merchant. We turned o'er many bookstogether. He is furnished with my opinion, which—bettered with his own learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend—comes with him at my importunity to fill up your grace’s request in my stead. I beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment tolet him lack a reverend estimation, for I never knew soyoung a body with so old a head. I leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You hear the learned Bellario, what he writes.And here I take it is the doctor come.—Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?
I did, my lord.
You are welcome. Take your place.Are you acquainted with the differenceThat holds this present question in the court?
I am informèd thoroughly of the cause.Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is your name Shylock?
Shylock is my name.
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow, Yet in such rule that the Venetian law Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.— [to ANTONIO] You stand within his danger, do you not?
Ay, so he says.
Do you confess the bond?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do.
Then must the Jew be merciful.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.
The quality of mercy is not strained. It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed: It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest. It becomes The thronèd monarch better than his crown. His scepter shows the force of temporal power, The attribute to awe and majesty Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings, But mercy is above this sceptered sway. It is enthronèd in the hearts of kings. It is an attribute to God himself. And earthly power doth then show likest God’s When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, Though justice be thy plea, consider this— That in the course of justice none of us Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy, And that same prayer doth teach us all to render The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much To mitigate the justice of thy plea, Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.
My deeds upon my head. I crave the law,The penalty, and forfeit of my bond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is he not able to discharge the money?
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court— Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice, I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er, On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. If this will not suffice, it must appear That malice bears down truth.— [to DUKE] And I beseech you, Wrest once the law to your authority. To do a great right, do a little wrong, And curb this cruel devil of his will.
It must not be. There is no power in Venice Can alter a decree establishèd. 'Twill be recorded for a precedent, And many an error by the same example Will rush into the state. It cannot be.
A Daniel come to judgment, yea, a Daniel!—O wise young judge, how I do honor thee!
I pray you, let me look upon the bond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][giving PORTIA a document] Here ’tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offered thee.
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven.Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?No, not for Venice.
Why, this bond is forfeit! And lawfully by this the Jew may claim A pound of flesh to be by him cut off Nearest the merchant’s heart.— Be merciful. Take thrice thy money. Bid me tear the bond.
When it is paid according to the tenor. It doth appear you are a worthy judge. You know the law. Your exposition Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law, Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar, Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear There is no power in the tongue of man To alter me. I stay here on my bond.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most heartily I do beseech the courtTo give the judgment.
Why then, thus it is: You must prepare your bosom for his knife.
O noble judge! O excellent young man!
For the intent and purpose of the lawHath full relation to the penalty,Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge!How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ANTONIO] Therefore lay bare your bosom.
Ay, his breast.So says the bond. Doth it not, noble judge?“Nearest his heart”—those are the very words.
It is so. Are there balance here to weighThe flesh?
I have them ready.
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,To stop his wounds lest he do bleed to death.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it so nominated in the bond?
It is not so expressed, but what of that?'Twere good you do so much for charity.
I cannot find it. 'Tis not in the bond.
[to ANTONIO] You, merchant, have you any thing to say?
But little. I am armed and well prepared.— Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well. Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you, For herein Fortune shows herself more kind Than is her custom. It is still her use To let the wretched man outlive his wealth, To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow An age of poverty— from which lingering penance Of such misery doth she cut me off. Commend me to your honorable wife. Tell her the process of Antonio’s end. Say how I loved you. Speak me fair in death. And when the tale is told, bid her be judge Whether Bassanio had not once a love. Repent but you that you shall lose your friend, And he repents not that he pays your debt. For if the Jew do cut but deep enough, I’ll pay it presently with all my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Antonio, I am married to a wife Which is as dear to me as life itself. But life itself, my wife, and all the world Are not with me esteemed above thy life. I would lose all—ay, sacrifice them all Here to this devil—to deliver you.
Your wife would give you little thanks for thatIf she were by to hear you make the offer.
I have a wife, whom I protest I love.I would she were in heaven, so she couldEntreat some power to change this currish Jew.
'Tis well you offer it behind her back.The wish would make else an unquiet house.
[aside] These be the Christian husbands. I have a daughter. Would any of the stock of Barabbas Had been her husband rather than a Christian!— We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A pound of that same merchant’s flesh is thine. The court awards it, and the law doth give it.
Most rightful judge!
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.The law allows it, and the court awards it.
Most learnèd judge, a sentence! Come, prepare.
Tarry a little. There is something else. This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood. The words expressly are “a pound of flesh.” Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh, But in the cutting it if thou dost shed One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods Are by the laws of Venice confiscate Unto the state of Venice.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O upright judge!—Mark, Jew.—O learnèd judge!
Is that the law?
Thyself shalt see the act.For as thou urgest justice, be assuredThou shalt have justice more than thou desirest.
O learnèd judge!—Mark, Jew, a learnèd judge!
I take this offer then: pay the bond thrice And let the Christian go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is the money.
Soft!The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste.He shall have nothing but the penalty.
O Jew! An upright judge, a learnèd judge!
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more But just a pound of flesh. If thou takest more Or less than a just pound, be it but so much As makes it light or heavy in the substance Or the division of the twentieth part Of one poor scruple— nay, if the scale do turn But in the estimation of a hair, Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.
A second Daniel!—A Daniel, Jew!Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.
Give me my principal, and let me go.
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.
He hath refused it in the open court.He shall have merely justice and his bond.
A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel!—I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Shall I not have barely my principal?
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeitureTo be so taken at thy peril, Jew.
Why then, the devil give him good of it!I’ll stay no longer question.
Tarry, Jew. The law hath yet another hold on you. It is enacted in the laws of Venice, If it be proved against an alien That by direct or indirect attempts He seek the life of any citizen, The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive Shall seize one half his goods. The other half Comes to the privy coffer of the state, And the offender’s life lies in the mercy Of the Duke only 'gainst all other voice. In which predicament I say thou stand’st, For it appears by manifest proceeding That indirectly—and directly too— Thou hast contrived against the very life Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred The danger formerly by me rehearsed. Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself, And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, Thou hast not left the value of a cord. Therefore thou must be hanged at the state’s charge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit, I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it. For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s. The other half comes to the general state, Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that. You take my house when you do take the prop That doth sustain my house. You take my life When you do take the means whereby I live.
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God’s sake.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So please my lord the duke and all the court, To quit the fine for one half of his goods I am content, so he will let me have The other half in use to render it Upon his death unto the gentleman That lately stole his daughter. Two things provided more: that for this favor He presently become a Christian; The other, that he do record a gift Here in the court, of all he dies possessed, Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.
He shall do this, or else I do recantThe pardon that I late pronouncèd here.
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?
I am content.
[to NERISSA] Clerk, draw a deed of gift.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you, give me leave to go from hence.I am not well. Send the deed after me,And I will sign it.
Get thee gone, but do it.
[to SHYLOCK] In christening shalt thou have two godfathers. Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more—To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
[to PORTIA] Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.
I humbly do desire your grace of pardon.I must away this night toward Padua, And it is meet I presently set forth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.—Antonio, gratify this gentleman,For in my mind you are much bound to him.
[to PORTIA] Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew We freely cope your courteous pains withal.
And stand indebted, over and above, In love and service to you evermore.
He is well paid that is well satisfied. And I, delivering you, am satisfied, And therein do account myself well paid. My mind was never yet more mercenary. I pray you, know me when we meet again. I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further. Take some remembrance of us as a tribute, Not as a fee. Grant me two things, I pray you: Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You press me far and therefore I will yield. [To ANTONIO] Give me your gloves. I’ll wear them for your sake. [To BASSANIO] And for your love, I’ll take this ring from you. Do not draw back your hand. I’ll take no more, And you in love shall not deny me this.
This ring, good sir—alas, it is a trifle.I will not shame myself to give you this.
I will have nothing else but only this.And now methinks I have a mind to it.
There’s more depends on this than on the value. The dearest ring in Venice will I give you, And find it out by proclamation. Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers. You taught me first to beg, and now methinksYou teach me how a beggar should be answered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife.And when she put it on, she made me vowThat I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.
That ’scuse serves many men to save their gifts. An if your wife be not a madwoman, And know how well I have deserved the ring, She would not hold out enemy forever For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.Let his deservings and my love withalBe valued against your wife’s commandment.
[giving GRATIANO the ring] Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.Give him the ring and bring him, if thou canst, Unto Antonio’s house. Away, make haste.
Come, you and I will thither presently.And in the morning early will we bothFly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Inquire the Jew’s house out. Give him this deed, And let him sign it. We’ll away tonight, And be a day before our husbands home. This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
[giving PORTIA BASSANIO’s ring] Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en. My Lord Bassanio upon more advice Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat Your company at dinner.
That cannot be. His ring I do accept most thankfully. And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore, I pray you show my youth old Shylock’s house.
That will I do.
[to PORTIA] Sir, I would speak with you. [aside to PORTIA] I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring,Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to NERISSA] Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing That they did give the rings away to men. But we’ll outface them, and outswear them too.— Away, make haste. Thou know’st where I will tarry.
[to GRATIANO] Come, good sir. Will you show me to this house?
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this, When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees And they did make no noise, in such a night Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents Where Cressid lay that night.
In such a nightDid Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dewAnd saw the lion’s shadow ere himselfAnd ran dismayed away.
In such a night Stood Dido with a willow in her handUpon the wild sea banks, and waft her loveTo come again to Carthage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In such a nightMedea gathered the enchanted herbsThat did renew old Æson.
In such a night Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,And with an unthrift love did run from VeniceAs far as Belmont.
In such a nightDid young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,And ne'er a true one.
In such a nightDid pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
I would outnight you, did nobody come.But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
A friend.
A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?
Stephano is my name, and I bring word My mistress will before the break of day Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays For happy wedlock hours.
Who comes with her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]None but a holy hermit and her maid.I pray you, is my master yet returned?
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.— But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica, And ceremoniously let us prepare Some welcome for the mistress of the house.
Sola, sola! Wo, ha, ho! Sola, sola!
Who calls?
Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo, sola,sola!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Leave holloaing, man. Here.
Sola! Where, where?
Here.
Tell him there’s a post come from my master with his horn full of good news. My master will be here ere morning.
Sweet soul, let’s in, and there expect their coming. And yet no matter. Why should we go in?— My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you, Within the house, your mistress is at hand. And bring your music forth into the air.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! Here will we sit and let the sounds of music Creep in our ears. Soft stillness and the night Become the touches of sweet harmony. Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st But in his motion like an angel sings, Still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins. Such harmony is in immortal souls, But whilst this muddy vesture of decay Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
Come ho, and wake Diana with a hymn!With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear,And draw her home with music.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
The reason is your spirits are attentive. For do but note a wild and wanton herd, Or race of youthful and unhandled colts, Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, Which is the hot condition of their blood— If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, Or any air of music touch their ears, You shall perceive them make a mutual stand, Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage, But music for the time doth change his nature. The man that hath no music in himself, Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils. The motions of his spirit are dull as night, And his affections dark as Erebus. Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.
That light we see is burning in my hall.How far that little candle throws his beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When the moon shone we did not see the candle.
So doth the greater glory dim the less. A substitute shines brightly as a king Until a king be by, and then his state Empties itself, as doth an inland brook Into the main of waters. Music, hark.
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark When neither is attended, and I think The nightingale, if she should sing by day When every goose is cackling, would be thought No better a musician than the wren. How many things by season seasoned are To their right praise and true perfection! Peace! How the moon sleeps with Endymion And would not be awaked.
That is the voice, Or I am much deceived, of Portia.
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo—By the bad voice.
Dear lady, welcome home.
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.Are they returned?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, they are not yet,But there is come a messenger beforeTo signify their coming.
Go in, Nerissa. Give order to my servants that they take No note at all of our being absent hence.— Nor you, Lorenzo.—Jessica, nor you.
Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.We are no tell-tales, madam. Fear you not.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick.It looks a little paler. 'Tis a day Such as the day is when the sun is hid.
[to PORTIA] We should hold day with the Antipodes,If you would walk in absence of the sun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let me give light, but let me not be light. For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, And never be Bassanio so for me. But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.This is the man, this is Antonio,To whom I am so infinitely bound.
You should in all sense be much bound to him.For as I hear he was much bound for you.
No more than I am well acquitted of.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.It must appear in other ways than words, Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to NERISSA] By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong. In faith, I gave it to the judge’s clerk. Would he were gelt that had it, for my part, Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
A quarrel, ho, already? What’s the matter?
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring That she did give me, whose posy was For all the world like cutler’s poetry Upon a knife, “Love me and leave me not.”
What talk you of the posy or the value? You swore to me when I did give it you That you would wear it till your hour of death, And that it should lie with you in your grave. Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, You should have been respective and have kept it. Gave it a judge’s clerk! No, God’s my judge. The clerk will ne'er wear hair on ’s face that had it.
He will, an if he live to be a man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth, A kind of boy, a little scrubbèd boy No higher than thyself, the judge’s clerk, A prating boy that begged it as a fee. I could not for my heart deny it him.
You were to blame, I must be plain with you, To part so slightly with your wife’s first gift, A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger And so riveted with faith unto your flesh. I gave my love a ring and made him swear Never to part with it. And here he stands. I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth That the world masters. Now in faith, Gratiano, You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief. An ’twere to me, I should be mad at it.
[aside] Why, I were best to cut my left hand offAnd swear I lost the ring defending it.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away Unto the judge that begged it and indeed Deserved it too. And then the boy, his clerk, That took some pains in writing, he begged mine. And neither man nor master would take aught But the two rings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What ring gave you my lord?Not that, I hope, which you received of me.
If I could add a lie unto a faultI would deny it. but you see my fingerHath not the ring upon it. It is gone.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bedUntil I see the ring.
[to GRATIANO] Nor I in yoursTill I again see mine.
Sweet Portia, If you did know to whom I gave the ring, If you did know for whom I gave the ring, And would conceive for what I gave the ring, And how unwillingly I left the ring When naught would be accepted but the ring, You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you had known the virtue of the ring, Or half her worthiness that gave the ring, Or your own honor to contain the ring, You would not then have parted with the ring. What man is there so much unreasonable, If you had pleased to have defended it With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty To urge the thing held as a ceremony? Nerissa teaches me what to believe. I’ll die for ’t but some woman had the ring.
No, by my honor, madam, by my soul, No woman had it but a civil doctor, Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me And begged the ring, the which I did deny him And suffered him to go displeased away— Even he that did uphold the very life Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady? I was enforced to send it after him. I was beset with shame and courtesy. My honor would not let ingratitude So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady, For by these blessèd candles of the night, Had you been there I think you would have begged The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house! Since he hath got the jewel that I loved, And that which you did swear to keep for me, I will become as liberal as you. I’ll not deny him anything I have, No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed. Know him I shall, I am well sure of it. Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus. If you do not, if I be left alone, Now, by mine honor—which is yet mine own— I’ll have that doctor for my bedfellow.
[to GRATIANO] And I his clerk. Therefore be well advisedHow you do leave me to mine own protection.
Well, do you so, let not me take him then.For if I do I’ll mar the young clerk’s pen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome notwithstanding.
Portia, forgive me this enforcèd wrong, And in the hearing of these many friends I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes Wherein I see myself—
Mark you but that! In both my eyes he doubly sees himself— In each eye, one. Swear by your double self, And there’s an oath of credit!
Nay, but hear me.Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swearI never more will break an oath with thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I once did lend my body for his wealth, Which but for him that had your husband’s ring Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again, My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord Will never more break faith advisedly.
[giving ANTONIO a ring] Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,And bid him keep it better than the other.
[giving BASSANIO PORTIA's ring] Here, Lord Bassanio. Swear to keep this ring.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][taking out a ring] And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano, For that same scrubbèd boy, the doctor’s clerk,In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
Why, this is like the mending of highwaysIn summer where the ways are fair enough!What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
Speak not so grossly.—You are all amazed. [takes out a letter] Here is a letter. Read it at your leisure. It comes from Padua, from Bellario. There you shall find that Portia was the doctor, Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here Shall witness I set forth as soon as you, And even but now returned. I have not yet Entered my house.—Antonio, you are welcome. And I have better news in store for you Than you expect. [gives ANTONIO another letter] Unseal this letter soon. There you shall find three of your argosies Are richly come to harbor suddenly. You shall not know by what strange accident I chancèd on this letter.
I am dumb.
[to PORTIA] Were you the doctor and I knew you not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to NERISSA] Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do itUnless he live until he be a man.
[to PORTIA] Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.When I am absent then lie with my wife.
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living.For here I read for certain that my shipsAre safely come to road.
How now, Lorenzo?My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and I’ll give them him without a fee. [gives LORENZO a document] There do I give to you and Jessica, From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift, After his death of all he dies possessed of.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the wayOf starvèd people.
It is almost morning, And yet I am sure you are not satisfied Of these events at full. Let us go in, And charge us there upon interr'gatories, And we will answer all things faithfully.
Let it be so. The first interrogatory That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is Whether till the next night she had rather stay, Or go to bed now, being two hours to day. But were the day come, I should wish it dark, That I were couching with the doctor’s clerk. Well, while I live I’ll fear no other thing So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.
Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star- chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and'Coram.'
Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.
Ay, and 'Rato-lorum' too; and a gentleman born, master parson; who writes himself 'Armigero,' in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, 'Armigero.'
Ay, that I do; and have done any time these threehundred years.
All his successors gone before him hath done't; and all his ancestors that come after him may: they may give the dozen white luces in their coat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is an old coat.
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well; it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.
The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old coat.
I may quarter, coz.
You may, by marrying.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes, py'r lady; if he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures: but that is all one. If Sir John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my benevolence to make atonements and compromises between you.
The council shall bear it; it is a riot.
It is not meet the council hear a riot; there is no fear of Got in a riot: the council, look you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your vizaments in that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the swordshould end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also another device in my prain, which peradventure prings goot discretions with it: there is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas Page, which is pretty virginity.
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speakssmall like a woman.
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed—Got deliver to a joyful resurrections! —give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not true. The knight, Sir John, is there; and, I beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the door for Master Page.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
[Within] Who's there?
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and JusticeShallow; and here young Master Slender, thatperadventures shall tell you another tale, ifmatters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your worships well.I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it your good heart! I wished your venison better; it was ill killed. How doth good Mistress Page?—and I thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I thank you.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say hewas outrun on Cotsall.
It could not be judged, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault;'tis a good dog.
A cur, sir.
Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be more said? he is good and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a goodoffice between you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that so, Master Page? He hath wronged me; indeed he hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
Here comes Sir John.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, andbroke open my lodge.
But not kissed your keeper's daughter?
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
I will answer it straight; I have done all this.That is now answered.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The council shall know this.
'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:you'll be laughed at.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Good worts! Good cabbage. Slender, I broke yourhead: what matter have you against me?
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you; and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You Banbury cheese!
Ay, it is no matter.
How now, Mephostophilus!
Ay, it is no matter.
Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice! that's my humour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is three umpires in this matter, as I understand; that is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself, fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.
We three, to hear it and end it between them.
Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note- book; and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great discreetly as we can.
Pistol!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hears with ears.
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'Hehears with ear'? why, it is affectations.
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might never come in mine own great chamber again else, of seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward shovel-boards, that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
Is this true, Pistol?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine, I combat challenge of this latten bilbo. Word of denial in thy labras here! Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
Be advised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say 'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on me; that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say you, Scarlet and John?
Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunkhimself out of his five sentences.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; andso conclusions passed the careers.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter: I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest, civil, godly company, for this trick: if I be drunk, I'll be drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
How now, Mistress Ford!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:by your leave, good mistress.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.
I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book ofSongs and Sonnets here.
How now, Simple! where have you been? I must wait on myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you, have you?
Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to Alice Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last, a fortnight afore Michaelmas?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here. Do you understand me?
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so,I shall do that that is reason.
Nay, but understand me.
So I do, sir.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I willdescription the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray you, pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country, simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question: the question isconcerning your marriage.
Ay, there's the point, sir.
Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne Page.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon anyreasonable demands.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one thatwould do reason.
Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak possitable, if you can carry her your desires towards her.
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will do a greater thing than that, upon yourrequest, cousin, in any reason.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I dois to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
I will marry her, sir, at your request: but if there be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we are married and have more occasion to know one another; I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt: but if you say, 'Marry her,' I will marry her; that I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discretion answer; save the fall is in the ort 'dissolutely:' the ort is, according to our meaning, 'resolutely:' his meaning is good.
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
The dinner is on the table; my father desires yourworships' company.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.
The dinner attends you, sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go, sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin Shallow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his friend for a man. I keep but three men and a boy yet, till my mother be dead: but what though? Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.
I may not go in without your worship: they will notsit till you come.
I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much asthough I did.
I pray you, sir, walk in.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised my shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence; three veneys for a dish of stewed prunes; and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since. Why do your dogs bark so? be there bears i' the town?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.
I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see the bear loose, are you not?
Ay, indeed, sir.
That's meat and drink to me, now. I have seen Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the chain; but, I warrant you, the women have so cried and shrieked at it, that it passed: but women, indeed, cannot abide 'em; they are very ill-favored rough things.
Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.
Nay, pray you, lead the way.
Come on, sir.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, sir; pray you, keep on.
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which is the way: and there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
Well, sir.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire and require her to solicit your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone: I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins and cheese tocome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mine host of the Garter!
What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of myfollowers.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier: let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a week.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall tap: said I well, bully Hector?
Do so, good mine host.
I have spoke; let him follow.
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.
Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade: an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a withered serving-man a fresh tapster. Go; adieu.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.
O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?
He was gotten in drink: is not the humour conceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox: his thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful singer; he kept not time.
The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Convey,' the wise it call. 'Steal!' foh! a ficofor the phrase!
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
Why, then, let kibes ensue.
There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must shift.
Young ravens must have food.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which of you know Ford of this town?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make love to Ford's wife: I spy entertainment in her; she discourses, she carves, she gives the leer of invitation: I can construe the action of her familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished rightly, is, 'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He hath studied her will, and translated her will,out of honesty into English.
The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of herhusband's purse: he hath a legion of angels.
As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.
The humour rises; it is good: humour me the angels.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have writ me here a letter to her: and here another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good eyes too, examined my parts with most judicious oeillades; sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes my portly belly.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
I thank thee for that humour.
O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's another letter to her: she bears the purse too; she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will be cheater to them both, and they shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou this letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will run no base humour: here, take thehumour-letter: I will keep the havior of reputation.
[To ROBIN] Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly; Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores. Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go; Trudge, plod away o' the hoof; seek shelter, pack! Falstaff will learn the humour of the age, French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.
Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam holds, And high and low beguiles the rich and poor: Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack, Base Phrygian Turk!
I have operations which be humours of revenge.
Wilt thou revenge?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By welkin and her star!
With wit or steel?
With both the humours, I:I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
And I to Ford shall eke unfold How Falstaff, varlet vile, His dove will prove, his gold will hold, And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to deal with poison; I will possess him with yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous: that is my true humour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee; troopon.
What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement, and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find any body in the house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and the king's English.
I'll go watch.
Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, infaith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.
An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in house withal, and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no breed-bate: his worst fault is, that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish that way: but nobody but has his fault; but let that pass. Peter Simple, you say your name is?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, for fault of a better.
And Master Slender's your master?
Ay, forsooth.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like aglover's paring-knife?
No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with alittle yellow beard, a Cain-coloured beard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands as any is between this and his head; he hath fought with a warrener.
How say you? O, I should remember him: does he nothold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?
Yes, indeed, does he.
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Out, alas! here comes my master.
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man;go into this closet: he will not stay long.
What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say! Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home. [Singing] And down, down, adown-a, & c.
Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box, a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.
Ay, forsooth; I'll fetch it you. [aside] I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found the young man, he would have been horn-mad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Jem'en vais a la cour—la grande affaire.
Is it this, sir?
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vereis dat knave Rugby?
What, John Rugby! John!
Here, sir!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.
'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me! Qu'ai-j'oublie! dere is some simples in my closet, dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.
Ay me, he'll find the young man here, and be mad!
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rugby, my rapier!
Good master, be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The young man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere isno honest man dat shall come in my closet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truthof it: he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
Vell.
Ay, forsooth; to desire her to—
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, tospeak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for mymaster in the way of marriage.
This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put myfinger in the fire, and need not.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.Tarry you a little-a while.
[Aside to SIMPLE] I am glad he is so quiet: if he had been thoroughly moved, you should have heard him so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding, man, I'll do you your master what good I can: and the very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my master,—I may call him my master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash, wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds and do all myself,—
[Aside to MISTRESS QUICKLY] 'Tis a great charge tocome under one body's hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to SIMPLE] Are you avised o' that? you shall find it a great charge: and to be up early and down late; but notwithstanding, —to tell you in your ear; I would have no words of it,—my master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but notwithstanding that, I know Anne's mind,—that's neither here nor there.
You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee park; and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make. You may be gone; it is not good you tarry here. By gar, I will cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog:
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest; and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I will myself have Anne Page.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. Wemust give folks leave to prate: what, the goodyear!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door. Follow my heels, Rugby.
You shall have An fool's-head of your own. No, I know Anne's mind for that: never a woman in Windsor knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more than I do with her, I thank heaven.
[Within] Who's within there? ho!
Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.
How now, good woman? how dost thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.
What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, andgentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell youthat by the way; I praise heaven for it.
Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose mysuit?
Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a book, she loves you. Have not your worship a wart above your eye?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke bread: we had an hour's talk of that wart. I shall never laugh but in that maid's company! But indeed she is given too much to allicholy and musing: but for you—well, go to.
Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf: if thou seest her before me, commend me.
Will I? i'faith, that we will; and I will tell your worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence; and of other wooers.
Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell to your worship.
Truly, an honest gentleman: but Anne loves him not;for I know Anne's mind as well as another does. Outupon't! what have I forgot?
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them?Let me see.
'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him not for his counsellor. You are not young, no more am I; go to then, there's sympathy: you are merry, so am I; ha, ha! then there's more sympathy: you love sack, and so do I; would you desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,—at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice,— that I love thee. I will not say, pity me; 'tis not a soldier-like phrase: but I say, love me. By me, Thine own true knight, By day or night, Or any kind of light, With all his might For thee to fight, JOHN FALSTAFF' What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked world! One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age to show himself a young gallant! What an unweighed behavior hath this Flemish drunkard picked—with the devil's name!—out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my mirth: Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men. How shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be, as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look veryill.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to the contrary.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.
Well, I do then; yet I say I could show you to thecontrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!
What's the matter, woman?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, Icould come to such honour!
Hang the trifle, woman! take the honour. What isit? dispense with trifles; what is it?
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,I could be knighted.
What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knightswill hack; and so thou shouldst not alter thearticle of thy gentry.
We burn daylight: here, read, read; perceive how I might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat men, as long as I have an eye to make difference of men's liking: and yet he would not swear; praised women's modesty; and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness, that I would have sworn his disposition would have gone to the truth of his words; but they do no more adhere and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of 'Green Sleeves.' What tempest, I trow, threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter: but let thine inherit first; for, I protest, mine never shall. I warrant he hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for different names—sure, more,—and these are of the second edition: he will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not what he puts into the press, when he would put us two. I had rather be a giantess, and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.
Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the verywords. What doth he think of us?
Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain myself like one that I am not acquainted withal; for, sure, unless he know some strain in me, that I know not myself, he would never have boarded me in thisfury.
'Boarding,' call you it? I'll be sure to keep himabove deck.
So will I if he come under my hatches, I'll never to sea again. Let's be revenged on him: let's appoint him a meeting; give him a show of comfort in his suit and lead him on with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him, that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O, that my husband saw this letter! it would give eternal food to his jealousy.
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too: he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him cause; and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.
You are the happier woman.
Let's consult together against this greasy knight.Come hither.
Well, I hope it be not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:Sir John affects thy wife.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor, Both young and old, one with another, Ford; He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.
Love my wife!
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:O, odious is the name!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What name, sir?
The horn, I say. Farewell. Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night: Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing. Away, Sir Corporal Nym! Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.
[Aside] I will be patient; I will find out this.
[To PAGE] And this is true; I like not the humour of lying. He hath wronged me in some humours: I should have borne the humoured letter to her; but I have a sword and it shall bite upon my necessity. He loves your wife; there's the short and the long. My name is Corporal Nym; I speak and I avouch; 'tis true: my name is Nym and Falstaff loves your wife. Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese, and there's the humour of it. Adieu.
'The humour of it,' quoth a'! here's a fellowfrights English out of his wits.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will seek out Falstaff.
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
If I do find it: well.
I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priesto' the town commended him for a true man.
'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Meg!
Whither go you, George? Hark you.
How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,will you go, Mistress Page?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George.
Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messengerto this paltry knight.
[Aside to MISTRESS PAGE] Trust me, I thought on her:she'll fit it.
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go in with us and see: we have an hour's talk withyou.
How now, Master Ford!
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
Do you think there is truth in them?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men; very rogues, now they be out of service.
Were they his men?
Marry, were they.
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie atthe Garter?
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on my head.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to turn them together. A man may be too confident: I would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes: there is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse when he looks so merrily.
How now, mine host!
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.Cavaleiro-justice, I say!
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go with us? we have sport in hand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell him, cavaleiro-justice; tell him, bully-rook.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hughthe Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
Good mine host o' the Garter, a word with you.
What sayest thou, my bully-rook?
[To PAGE] Will you go with us to behold it? My merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and, I think, hath appointed them contrary places; for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hast thou no suit against my knight, myguest-cavaleire?
None, I protest: but I'll give you a pottle ofburnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell himmy name is Brook; only for a jest.
My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress; —said I well?—and thy name shall be Brook. It is a merry knight. Will you go, An-heires?
Have with you, mine host.
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill inhis rapier.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and I know not what: 'tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis here, 'tis here. I have seen the time, with my long sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip likerats.
Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag?
Have with you. I would rather hear them scold than fight.
Though Page be a secure fool, an stands so firmly on his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so easily: she was in his company at Page's house; and what they made there, I know not. Well, I will look further into't: and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff. If I find her honest, I lose not my labour; if she be otherwise, 'tis labour well bestowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then the world's mine oyster.Which I with sword will open.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should lay my countenance to pawn; I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for you and your coach-fellow Nym; or else you had looked through the grate, like a geminy of baboons. I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen my friends, you were good soldiers and tall fellows; and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took't upon mine honour thou hadst it not.
Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteen pence?
Reason, you rogue, reason: thinkest thou I'll endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go. A short knife and a throng! To your manor of Pickt-hatch! Go. You'll not bear a letter for me, you rogue! you stand upon your honour! Why, thou unconfinable baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the terms of my honour precise: I, I, I myself sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to shuffle, to hedge and to lurch; and yet you, rogue, will ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating oaths, under the shelter of your honour! You will not do it, you!
I do relent: what would thou more of man?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.
Let her approach.
Give your worship good morrow.
Good morrow, good wife.
Not so, an't please your worship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good maid, then.
I'll be sworn,As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Two thousand, fair woman: and I'll vouchsafe theethe hearing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is one Mistress Ford, sir:—I pray, come alittle nearer this ways:—I myself dwell with masterDoctor Caius,—
Well, on: Mistress Ford, you say,—
Your worship says very true: I pray your worship,come a little nearer this ways.
I warrant thee, nobody hears; mine own people, mineown people.
Are they so? God bless them and make them his servants!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, Mistress Ford; what of her?
Why, sir, she's a good creature. Lord Lord! yourworship's a wanton! Well, heaven forgive you and allof us, I pray!
Mistress Ford; come, Mistress Ford,—
Marry, this is the short and the long of it; you have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her to such a canary. Yet there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with their coaches, I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter, gift after gift; smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold; and in such alligant terms; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the fairest, that would have won any woman's heart; and, I warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of her: I had myself twenty angels given me this morning; but I defy all angels, in any such sort, as they say, but in the way of honesty: and, I warrant you, they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all: and yet there has been earls, nay, which is more, pensioners; but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
But what says she to me? be brief, my goodshe-Mercury.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which she thanks you a thousand times; and she gives you to notify that her husband will be absence from his house between ten and eleven.
Ten and eleven?
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the picture, she says, that you wot of: Master Ford, her husband, will be from home. Alas! the sweet woman leads an ill life with him: he's a very jealousy man: she leads a very frampold life with him, good heart.
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I willnot fail her.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to your worship. Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations to you too: and let me tell you in your ear, she's as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in Windsor, whoe'er be the other: and she bade me tell your worship that her husband is seldom from home; but she hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so dote upon a man: surely I think you have charms, la; yes, in truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, I assure thee: setting the attractions of mygood parts aside I have no other charms.
Blessing on your heart for't!
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife andPage's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
That were a jest indeed! they have not so little grace, I hope: that were a trick indeed! but Mistress Page would desire you to send her your little page, of all loves: her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page; and truly Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in Windsor leads a better life than she does: do what she will, say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must send her your page; no remedy.
Why, I will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but do so, then: and, look you, he may come and go between you both; and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another's mind, and the boy never need to understand any thing; for 'tis not good that children should know any wickedness: old folks, you know, have discretion, as they say, and know the world.
Fare thee well: commend me to them both: there'smy purse; I am yet thy debtor. Boy, go along withthis woman.
This news distracts me!
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers: Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights: Give fire: she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
Sayest thou so, old Jack? go thy ways; I'll make more of thy old body than I have done. Will they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee. Let them say 'tis grossly done; so it be fairly done, no matter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would fainspeak with you, and be acquainted with you; and hathsent your worship a morning's draught of sack.
Brook is his name?
Ay, sir.
Call him in.
Such Brooks are welcome to me, that o'erflow such liquor. Ah, ha! Mistress Ford and Mistress Page have I encompassed you? go to; via!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bless you, sir!
And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
I make bold to press with so little preparation uponyou.
You're welcome. What's your will? Give us leave, drawer.
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much; my name is Brook.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours: not to charge you; for I must let you understand I think myself in better plight for a lender than you are: the which hath something embolden'd me to this unseasoned intrusion; for they say, if money go before, all ways do lie open.
Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me: if you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
Speak, good Master Brook: I shall be glad to beyour servant.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar,—I will be brief with you,—and you have been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means, as desire, to make myself acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine own imperfection: but, good Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn another into the register of your own; that I may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you yourself know how easy it is to be such an offender.
Very well, sir; proceed.
There is a gentlewoman in this town; her husband'sname is Ford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, sir.
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you, bestowed much on her; followed her with a doting observance; engrossed opportunities to meet her; fee'd every slight occasion that could but niggardly give me sight of her; not only bought many presents to give her, but have given largely to many to know what she would have given; briefly, I have pursued her as love hath pursued me; which hath been on the wing of all occasions. But whatsoever I have merited, either in my mind or, in my means, meed, I am sure, I have received none; unless experience be a jewel that I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught me to say this: 'Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues; Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.'
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Never.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never.
Of what quality was your love, then?
Like a fair house built on another man's ground; so that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
When I have told you that, I have told you all. Some say, that though she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now, Sir John, here is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your place and person, generally allowed for your many war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, sir!
Believe it, for you know it. There is money; spend it, spend it; spend more; spend all I have; only give me so much of your time in exchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Ford's wife: use your art of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as any.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection, that I should win what you would enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on the excellency of her honour, that the folly of my soul dares not present itself: she is too bright to be looked against. Now, could I could come to her with any detection in my hand, my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves: I could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand other her defences, which now are too too strongly embattled against me. What say you to't, Sir John?
Master Brook, I will first make bold with yourmoney; next, give me your hand; and last, as I am agentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Ford's wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O good sir!
I say you shall.
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall want none. I shall be with her, I may tell you, by her own appointment; even as you came in to me, her assistant or go-between parted from me: I say I shall be with her between ten and eleven; for at that time the jealous rascally knave her husband will be forth. Come you to me at night; you shall know how I speed.
I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford,sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him poor; they say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money; for the which his wife seems to me well-favored. I will use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer; and there's my harvest-home.
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid himif you saw him.
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will stare him out of his wits; I will awe him with my cudgel: it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife. Come to me soon at night. Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his style; thou, Master Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold. Come to me soon at night.
What a damned Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is ready to crack with impatience. Who says this is improvident jealousy? my wife hath sent to him; the hour is fixed; the match is made. Would any man have thought this? See the hell of having a false woman! My bed shall be abused, my coffers ransacked, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall not only receive this villanous wrong, but stand under the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me this wrong. Terms! names! Amaimon sounds well; Lucifer, well; Barbason, well; yet they are devils' additions, the names of fiends: but Cuckold! Wittol!—Cuckold! the devil himself hath not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass: he will trust his wife; he will not be jealous. I will rather trust a Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my aqua-vitae bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling gelding, than my wife with herself; then she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break their hearts but they will effect. God be praised for my jealousy! Eleven o'clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it; better three hours too soon than a minute too late. Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!
Jack Rugby!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir?
Vat is de clock, Jack?
'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised to meet.
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come; he has pray his Pible well, dat he is no come: by gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.
He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would killhim, if he came.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.Take your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill killhim.
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.
Villany, take your rapier.
Forbear; here's company.
Bless thee, bully doctor!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
Now, good master doctor!
Give you good morrow, sir.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse; to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian? is he dead, my Francisco? ha, bully! What says my AEsculapius? my Galen? my heart of elder? ha! is he dead, bully stale? is he dead?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld; heis not show his face.
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece, my boy!
I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six orseven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no come.
He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should fight, you go against the hair of your professions. Is it not true, Master Page?
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a greatfighter, though now a man of peace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make one. Though we are justices and doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are the sons of women, Master Page.
'Tis true, Master Shallow.
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am sworn of the peace: you have showed yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman. You must go with me, master doctor.
Pardon, guest-justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mock-vater! vat is dat?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me vill cut his ears.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
Clapper-de-claw! vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me;for, by gar, me vill have it.
And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
Me tank you for dat.
And, moreover, bully,—but first, master guest, andMaster Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go youthrough the town to Frogmore.
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He is there: see what humour he is in; and I willbring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
We will do it.
Adieu, good master doctor.
By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for ajack-an-ape to Anne Page.
Let him die: sheathe thy impatience, throw cold water on thy choler: go about the fields with me through Frogmore: I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting; and thou shalt woo her. Cried I aim? said I well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you; and I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
For the which I will be thy adversary toward AnnePage. Said I well?
By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
Let us wag, then.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray you now, good master Slender's serving-man,and friend Simple by your name, which way have youlooked for Master Caius, that calls himself doctor of physic?
Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward, everyway; old Windsor way, and every way but the townway.
I most fehemently desire you you will also look thatway.
I will, sir.
'Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog his urinals about his knave's costard when I have good opportunities for the ork. 'Pless my soul!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To shallow rivers, to whose falls Melodious birds sings madrigals; There will we make our peds of roses, And a thousand fragrant posies. To shallow— Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
Melodious birds sing madrigals— When as I sat in Pabylon— And a thousand vagram posies. To shallow & c.
Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.
He's welcome.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No weapons, sir. There comes my master, MasterShallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, overthe stile, this way.
Pray you, give me my gown; or else keep it in your arms.
How now, master Parson! Good morrow, good Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student from his book, and it is wonderful.
[Aside] Ah, sweet Anne Page!
'Save you, good Sir Hugh!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
What, the sword and the word! do you study themboth, master parson?
And youthful still! in your doublet and hose thisraw rheumatic day!
There is reasons and causes for it.
We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fery well: what is it?
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike having received wrong by some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience that ever you saw.
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never heard a man of his place, gravity and learning, so wide of his own respect.
What is he?
I think you know him; Master Doctor Caius, therenowned French physician.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Got's will, and his passion of my heart! I had aslief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
Why?
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, —and he is a knave besides; a cowardly knave as you would desires to be acquainted withal.
I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
[Aside] O sweet Anne Page!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder:here comes Doctor Caius.
Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon.
So do you, good master doctor.
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keeptheir limbs whole and hack our English.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside to DOCTOR CAIUS] Pray you, use your patience:in good time.
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
[Aside to DOCTOR CAIUS] Pray you let us not be laughing-stocks to other men's humours; I desire you in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends. [Aloud so that the others can hear] I will knog your urinals about your knave's cockscomb for missing your meetings and appointments.
Diable! Jack Rugby,—mine host de Jarteer,—have I not stay for him to kill him? have I not, at de place I did appoint?
As I am a Christians soul now, look you, this is the place appointed: I'll be judgement by mine host of the Garter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,soul-curer and body-curer!
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.
Peace, I say! hear mine host of the Garter. Am I politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my doctor? no; he gives me the potions and the motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? no; he gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial; so. Give me thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of art, I have deceived you both; I have directed you to wrong places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be the issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace; follow, follow, follow.
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
[Aside] O sweet Anne Page!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot ofus, ha, ha?
This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy cogging companion, the host of the Garter.
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring mewhere is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, follow.
Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a manthan follow him like a dwarf.
O, you are a flattering boy: now I see you'll be a courtier.
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want of company. I think, if your husbands were dead, you two would marry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Be sure of that,—two other husbands.
Where had you this pretty weather-cock?
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my husband had him of. What do you call your knight's name, sirrah?
Sir John Falstaff.
Sir John Falstaff!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such a league between my good man and he! Is your wife at home indeed?
Indeed she is.
By your leave, sir: I am sick till I see her.
Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them. Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve score. He pieces out his wife's inclination; he gives her folly motion and advantage: and now she's going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her. A man may hear this shower sing in the wind. And Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots, they are laid; and our revolted wives share damnation together. Well; I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings all my neighbours shall cry aim.
The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me search: there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be rather praised for this than mocked; for it is as positive as the earth is firm that Falstaff is there: I will go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well met, Master Ford.
Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home;and I pray you all go with me.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine withMistress Anne, and I would not break with her formore money than I'll speak of.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page andmy cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I hope I have your good will, father Page.
You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you:but my wife, master doctor, is for you altogether.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-aQuickly tell me so mush.
What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April and May: he will carry't, he will carry't; 'tis in his buttons; he will carry't.
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is of no having: he kept company with the wild prince and Poins; he is of too high a region; he knows too much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of my substance: if he take her, let him take her simply; the wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have sport; I will show you a monster. Master doctor, you shall go; so shall you, Master Page; and you, Sir Hugh.
Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooingat Master Page's.
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.
Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knightFalstaff, and drink canary with him.
[Aside] I think I shall drink in pipe wine firstwith him; I'll make him dance. Will you go, gentles?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have with you to see this monster.
What, John! What, Robert!
Quickly, quickly! is the buck-basket—
I warrant. What, Robert, I say!
Come, come, come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, set it down.
Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be ready here hard by in the brew-house: and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and without any pause or staggering take this basket on your shoulders: that done, trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames side.
You will do it?
I ha' told them over and over; they lack nodirection. Be gone, and come when you are called.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes little Robin.
How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you?
My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door,Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
Ay, I'll be sworn. My master knows not of your being here and hath threatened to put me into everlasting liberty if I tell you of it; for he swears he'll turn me away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou'rt a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doublet and hose. I'll go hide me.
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
Go to, then: we'll use this unwholesome humidity,this gross watery pumpion; we'll teach him to knowturtles from jays.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel? Why, now let me die, for I have lived long enough: this is the period of my ambition: O this blessed hour!
O sweet Sir John!
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate, Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would thy husband were dead: I'll speak it before the best lord; I would make thee my lady.
I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady!
Let the court of France show me such another. I see how thine eye would emulate the diamond: thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian admittance.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A plain kerchief, Sir John: my brows become nothingelse; nor that well neither.
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so: thou wouldst make an absolute courtier; and the firm fixture of thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale. I see what thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend. Come, thou canst not hide it.
Believe me, there is no such thing in me.
What made me love thee? let that persuade thee there's something extraordinary in thee. Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and that, like a many of these lisping hawthorn-buds, that come like women in men's apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple time; I cannot: but I love thee; none but thee; and thou deservest it.
Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love Mistress Page.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by theCounter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reekof a lime-kiln.
Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you shall oneday find it.
Keep in that mind; I'll deserve it.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could notbe in that mind.
[Within] Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! here'sMistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing andlooking wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She shall not see me: I will ensconce me behind the arras.
Pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman.
What's the matter? how now!
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're shamed,you're overthrown, you're undone for ever!
What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O well-a-day, Mistress Ford! having an honest manto your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
What cause of suspicion?
What cause of suspicion! Out pon you! how am Imistook in you!
Why, alas, what's the matter?
Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he says is here now in the house by your consent, to take an ill advantage of his assence: you are undone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis not so, I hope.
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here! but 'tis most certain your husband's coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one. I come before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why, I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here convey, convey him out. Be not amazed; call all your senses to you; defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.
What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear friend; and I fear not mine own shame so much as his peril: I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the house.
For shame! never stand 'you had rather' and 'you had rather:' your husband's here at hand, bethink you of some conveyance: in the house you cannot hide him. O, how have you deceived me! Look, here is a basket: if he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking: or—it is whiting-time —send him by your two men to Datchet-mead.
He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Coming forward] Let me see't, let me see't, O, letme see't! I'll in, I'll in. Follow your friend'scounsel. I'll in.
What, Sir John Falstaff! Are these your letters, knight?
I love thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.I'll never—
Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,Mistress Ford. You dissembling knight!
What, John! Robert! John!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the cowl-staff? look, how you drumble! Carry them to the laundress in Datchet-meat; quickly, come.
Pray you, come near: if I suspect without cause, why then make sport at me; then let me be your jest; I deserve it. How now! whither bear you this?
To the laundress, forsooth.
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? Youwere best meddle with buck-washing.
Buck! I would I could wash myself of the buck! Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck; I warrant you, buck; and of the season too, it shall appear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night; I'll tell you my dream. Here, here, here be my keys: ascend my chambers; search, seek, find out: I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox. Let me stop this way first.
So, now uncape.
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.
True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen: you shall seesport anon: follow me, gentlemen.
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is notjealous in France.
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.
Is there not a double excellency in this?
I know not which pleases me better, that my husbandis deceived, or Sir John.
What a taking was he in when your husband asked whowas in the basket!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am half afraid he will have need of washing; sothrowing him into the water will do him a benefit.
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the samestrain were in the same distress.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion ofFalstaff's being here; for I never saw him so grossin his jealousy till now.
I will lay a plot to try that; and we will yet have more tricks with Falstaff: his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine.
Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the water; and give him another hope, to betray him to another punishment?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We will do it: let him be sent for to-morrow,eight o'clock, to have amends.
I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of thathe could not compass.
[Aside to MISTRESS FORD] Heard you that?
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
Ay, I do so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
Amen!
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.
If there be any pody in the house, and in thechambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses,heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor Castle.
'Tis my fault, Master Page: I suffer for it.
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is ashonest a 'omans as I will desires among fivethousand, and five hundred too.
By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in the Park: I pray you, pardon me; I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this. Come, wife; come, Mistress Page. I pray you, pardon me; pray heartily, pardon me.
Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock him. I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast: after, we'll a-birding together; I have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?
Any thing.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
If dere be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, go, Master Page.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousyknave, mine host.
Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart!
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
I see I cannot get thy father's love;Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, how then?
Why, thou must be thyself. He doth object I am too great of birth—, And that, my state being gall'd with my expense, I seek to heal it only by his wealth: Besides these, other bars he lays before me, My riots past, my wild societies; And tells me 'tis a thing impossible I should love thee but as a property.
May be he tells you true.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come! Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne: Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags; And 'tis the very riches of thyself That now I aim at.
Gentle Master Fenton, Yet seek my father's love; still seek it, sir: If opportunity and humblest suit Cannot attain it, why, then,—hark you hither!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Break their talk, Mistress Quickly: my kinsman shallspeak for himself.
I'll make a shaft or a bolt on't: 'slid, 'tis butventuring.
Be not dismayed.
No, she shall not dismay me: I care not for that,but that I am afeard.
Hark ye; Master Slender would speak a word with you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I come to him.
This is my father's choice.O, what a world of vile ill-favor'd faultsLooks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.
She's coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell you good jests of him. Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne the jest, how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good uncle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman inGloucestershire.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under thedegree of a squire.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that goodcomfort. She calls you, coz: I'll leave you.
Now, Master Slender,—
Now, good Mistress Anne,—
What is your will?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My will! 'od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven; I am not such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing with you. Your father and my uncle hath made motions: if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be his dole! They can tell you how things go better than I can: you may ask your father; here he comes.
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne. Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here? You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house: I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
She is no match for you.
Sir, will you hear me?
No, good Master Fenton.Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Speak to Mistress Page.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter In such a righteous fashion as I do, Perforce, against all cheques, rebukes and manners, I must advance the colours of my love And not retire: let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
That's my master, master doctor.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' the earthAnd bowl'd to death with turnips!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master Fenton, I will not be your friend nor enemy: My daughter will I question how she loves you, And as I find her, so am I affected. Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in; Her father will be angry.
Farewell, gentle mistress: farewell, Nan.
This is my doing, now: 'Nay,' said I, 'will you castaway your child on a fool, and a physician? Look onMaster Fenton:' this is my doing.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-nightGive my sweet Nan this ring: there's for thy pains.
Now heaven send thee good fortune!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A kind heart he hath: a woman would run through fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I would my master had Mistress Anne; or I would Master Slender had her; or, in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her; I will do what I can for them all three; for so I have promised, and I'll be as good as my word; but speciously for Master Fenton. Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two mistresses: what a beast am I to slack it!
Bardolph, I say,—
Here, sir.
Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in't.
Have I lived to be carried in a basket, like a barrow of butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick, I'll have my brains ta'en out and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new-year's gift. The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse as they would have drowned a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen i' the litter: and you may know by my size that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as deep as hell, I should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and shallow,—a death that I abhor; for the water swells a man; and what a thing should I have been when I had been swelled! I should have been a mountain of mummy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.
L et me pour in some sack to the Thames water; for my belly's as cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
Come in, woman!
By your leave; I cry you mercy: give your worshipgood morrow.
Take away these chalices. Go brew me a pottle ofsack finely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]With eggs, sir?
Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
How now!
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.
Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough; I was throwninto the ford; I have my belly full of ford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault:she does so take on with her men; they mistook their erection.
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's promise.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn your heart to see it. Her husband goes this morning a-birding; she desires you once more to come to her between eight and nine: I must carry her word quickly: she'll make you amends, I warrant you.
Well, I will visit her: tell her so; and bid her think what a man is: let her consider his frailty, and then judge of my merit.
I will tell her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do so. Between nine and ten, sayest thou?
Eight and nine, sir.
Well, be gone: I will not miss her.
Peace be with you, sir.
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me wordto stay within: I like his money well. O, here he comes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bless you, sir!
Now, master Brook, you come to know what hath passedbetween me and Ford's wife?
That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
Master Brook, I will not lie to you: I was at herhouse the hour she appointed me.
And sped you, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.
How so, sir? Did she change her determination?
No, Master Brook; but the peaking Cornuto her husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual 'larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested, and, as it were, spoke the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of his companions, thither provoked and instigated by his distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house for his wife's love.
What, while you were there?
While I was there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And did he search for you, and could not find you?
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mistress Page; gives intelligence of Ford's approach; and, in her invention and Ford's wife's distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.
A buck-basket!
By the Lord, a buck-basket! rammed me in with foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy napkins; that, Master Brook, there was the rankest compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril.
And how long lay you there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have suffered to bring this woman to evil for your good. Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple of Ford's knaves, his hinds, were called forth by their mistress to carry me in the name of foul clothes to Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders; met the jealous knave their master in the door, who asked them once or twice what they had in their basket: I quaked for fear, lest the lunatic knave would have searched it; but fate, ordaining he should be a cuckold, held his hand. Well: on went he for a search, and away went I for foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master Brook: I suffered the pangs of three several deaths; first, an intolerable fright, to be detected with a jealous rotten bell-wether; next, to be compassed, like a good bilbo, in the circumference of a peck, hilt to point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in, like a strong distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease: think of that,—a man of my kidney,—think of that,—that am as subject to heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw: it was a miracle to scape suffocation. And in the height of this bath, when I was more than half stewed in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be thrown into the Thames, and cooled, glowing hot, in that surge, like a horse-shoe; think of that,—hissing hot,—think of that, Master Brook.
In good sadness, I am sorry that for my sake you have sufferd all this. My suit then is desperate; you'll undertake her no more?
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus. Her husband is this morning gone a-birding: I have received from her another embassy of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is the hour, Master Brook.
'Tis past eight already, sir.
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment. Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed; and the conclusion shall be crowned with your enjoying her. Adieu. You shall have her, Master Brook; Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hum! ha! is this a vision? is this a dream? do I sleep? Master Ford awake! awake, Master Ford! there's a hole made in your best coat, Master Ford. This 'tis to be married! this 'tis to have linen and buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself what I am: I will now take the lecher; he is at my house; he cannot 'scape me; 'tis impossible he should; he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse, nor into a pepper-box: but, lest the devil that guides him should aid him, I will search impossible places. Though what I am I cannot avoid, yet to be what I would not shall not make me tame: if I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go with me: I'll be horn-mad.
Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
Sure he is by this, or will be presently: but,truly, he is very courageous mad about his throwinginto the water. Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
I'll be with her by and by; I'll but bring my youngman here to school. Look, where his master comes;'tis a playing-day, I see.
How now, Sir Hugh! no school to-day?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
Blessing of his heart!
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing inthe world at his book. I pray you, ask him somequestions in his accidence.
Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer yourmaster, be not afraid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]William, how many numbers is in nouns?
Two.
Truly, I thought there had been one number more,because they say, ''Od's nouns.'
Peace your tattlings! What is 'fair,' William?
Pulcher.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Polecats! there are fairer things than polecats, sure.
You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.What is 'lapis,' William?
A stone.
And what is 'a stone,' William?
A pebble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, it is 'lapis:' I pray you, remember in your prain.
Lapis.
That is a good William. What is he, William, thatdoes lend articles?
Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thusdeclined, Singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc.
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark:genitivo, hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Accusativo, hinc.
I pray you, have your remembrance, child,accusative, hung, hang, hog.
'Hang-hog' is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.
Leave your prabbles, 'oman. What is the focativecase, William?
O,—vocativo, O.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Remember, William; focative is caret.
And that's a good root.
'Oman, forbear.
Peace!
What is your genitive case plural, William?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Genitive case!
Ay.
Genitive,—horum, harum, horum.
Vengeance of Jenny's case! fie on her! never nameher, child, if she be a whore.
For shame, 'oman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do ill to teach the child such words: he teaches him to hick and to hack, which they'll do fast enough of themselves, and to call 'horum:' fie upon you!
'Oman, art thou lunatics? hast thou no understandings for thy cases and the numbers of the genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as I would desires.
Prithee, hold thy peace.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.
Forsooth, I have forgot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your 'quies,'your 'quaes,' and your 'quods,' you must bepreeches. Go your ways, and play; go.
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your love, and I profess requital to a hair's breadth; not only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement, complement and ceremony of it. But are you sure of your husband now?
He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.
[Within] What, ho, gossip Ford! what, ho!
Step into the chamber, Sir John.
How now, sweetheart! who's at home besides yourself?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, none but mine own people.
Indeed!
No, certainly. [Aside to her] Speak louder.
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
Why?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again: he so takes on yonder with my husband; so rails against all married mankind; so curses all Eve'sdaughters, of what complexion soever; and so buffetshimself on the forehead, crying, 'Peer out, peerout!' that any madness I ever yet beheld seemed buttameness, civility and patience, to this hisdistemper he is in now: I am glad the fat knight is nothere.
Why, does he talk of him?
Of none but him; and swears he was carried out, the last time he searched for him, in a basket; protests to my husband he is now here, and hath drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport, to make another experiment of his suspicion: but I am glad the knight is not here; now he shall see his own foolery.
How near is he, Mistress Page?
Hard by; at street end; he will be here anon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am undone! The knight is here.
Why then you are utterly shamed, and he's but a deadman. What a woman are you!—Away with him, awaywith him! better shame than murder.
Which way should be go? how should I bestow him?Shall I put him into the basket again?
No, I'll come no more i' the basket. May I not goout ere he come?
Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the doorwith pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwiseyou might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
There they always use to discharge theirbirding-pieces. Creep into the kiln-hole.
Where is it?
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his note: there is no hiding you in thehouse.
I'll go out then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you go out in your own semblance, you die, SirJohn. Unless you go out disguised—
How might we disguise him?
Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's gownbig enough for him otherwise he might put on a hat,a muffler and a kerchief, and so escape.
Good hearts, devise something: any extremity ratherthan a mischief.
My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has agown above.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as heis: and there's her thrummed hat and her mufflertoo. Run up, Sir John.
Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I willlook some linen for your head.
Quick, quick! we'll come dress you straight: puton the gown the while.
I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman of Brentford; he swears she's a witch; forbade her my house and hath threatened to beat her.
Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel, and thedevil guide his cudgel afterwards!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But is my husband coming?
Ah, in good sadness, is he; and talks of the baskettoo, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men to carry thebasket again, to meet him at the door with it, asthey did last time.
Nay, but he'll be here presently: let's go dress himlike the witch of Brentford.
I'll first direct my men what they shall do with thebasket. Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse him enough. We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do, Wives may be merry, and yet honest too: We do not act that often jest and laugh; 'Tis old, but true, Still swine eat all the draff.
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders:your master is hard at door; if he bid you set itdown, obey him: quickly, dispatch.
Come, come, take it up.
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.
I hope not; I had as lief bear so much lead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket, villain! Somebody call my wife. Youth in a basket! O you panderly rascals! there's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy against me: now shall the devil be shamed. What, wife, I say! Come, come forth! Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching!
Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to goloose any longer; you must be pinioned.
Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog!
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
So say I too, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford the honestwoman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, thathath the jealous fool to her husband! I suspectwithout cause, mistress, do I?
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me inany dishonesty.
Well said, brazen-face! hold it out. Come forth, sirrah!
This passes!
Are you not ashamed? let the clothes alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I shall find you anon.
'Tis unreasonable! Will you take up your wife'sclothes? Come away.
Empty the basket, I say!
Why, man, why?
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed out of my house yesterday in this basket: why may not he be there again? In my house I am sure he is: my intelligence is true; my jealousy is reasonable. Pluck me out all the linen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's death.
Here's no man.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; thiswrongs you.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow theimaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.
Well, he's not here I seek for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
Help to search my house this one time. If I find not what I seek, show no colour for my extremity; let me for ever be your table-sport; let them say of me, 'As jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow walnut for his wife's leman.' Satisfy me once more; once more search with me.
What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and the old womandown; my husband will come into the chamber.
Old woman! what old woman's that?
Nay, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not forbid her my house? She comes of errands, does she? We are simple men; we do not know what's brought to pass under the profession of fortune-telling. She works by charms, by spells, by the figure, and such daubery as this is, beyond our element we know nothing. Come down, you witch, you hag, you; come down, I say!
Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let himnot strike the old woman.
Come, Mother Prat; come, give me your hand.
I'll prat her.
Out of my door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, youpolecat, you runyon! out, out! I'll conjure you,I'll fortune-tell you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed thepoor woman.
Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
Hang her, witch!
By the yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witchindeed: I like not when a 'oman has a great peard;I spy a great peard under his muffler.
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow;see but the issue of my jealousy: if I cry out thusupon no trail, never trust me when I open again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let's obey his humour a little further: come,gentlemen.
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
Nay, by the mass, that he did not; he beat him mostunpitifully, methought.
I'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o'er thealtar; it hath done meritorious service.
What think you? may we, with the warrant ofwomanhood and the witness of a good conscience,pursue him with any further revenge?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The spirit of wantonness is, sure, scared out of him: if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste, attempt us again.
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the figures out of your husband's brains. If they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.
I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed: andmethinks there would be no period to the jest,should he not be publicly shamed.
Come, to the forge with it then; shape it: I wouldnot have things cool.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, the Germans desire to have three of yourhorses: the duke himself will be to-morrow atcourt, and they are going to meet him.
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hearnot of him in the court. Let me speak with thegentlemen: they speak English?
Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.
They shall have my horses; but I'll make them pay; I'll sauce them: they have had my house a week at command; I have turned away my other guests: they must come off; I'll sauce them. Come.
'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman as everI did look upon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
Within a quarter of an hour.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt; I rather will suspect the sun with cold Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand In him that was of late an heretic, As firm as faith.
'Tis well, 'tis well; no more: Be not as extreme in submission As in offence. But let our plot go forward: let our wives Yet once again, to make us public sport, Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow, Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How? to send him word they'll meet him in the parkat midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers and has been grievously peaten as an old 'oman: methinks there should be terrors in him that he should not come; methinks his flesh is punished, he shall have no desires.
So think I too.
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter, Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest, Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight, Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns; And there he blasts the tree and takes the cattle And makes milch-kine yield blood and shakes a chain In a most hideous and dreadful manner: You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know The superstitious idle-headed eld Received and did deliver to our age This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, yet there want not many that do fearIn deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak:But what of this?
Marry, this is our device;That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come:And in this shape when you have brought him thither,What shall be done with him? what is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus: Nan Page my daughter and my little son And three or four more of their growth we'll dress Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white, With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads, And rattles in their hands: upon a sudden, As Falstaff, she and I, are newly met, Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once With some diffused song: upon their sight, We two in great amazedness will fly: Then let them all encircle him about And, fairy-like, to-pinch the unclean knight, And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel, In their so sacred paths he dares to tread In shape profane.
And till he tell the truth,Let the supposed fairies pinch him soundAnd burn him with their tapers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The truth being known,We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,And mock him home to Windsor.
The children mustBe practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.
I will teach the children their behaviors; and Iwill be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn theknight with my taber.
That will be excellent. I'll go and buy them vizards.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,Finely attired in a robe of white.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That silk will I go buy.
And in that timeShall Master Slender steal my Nan awayAnd marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
Nay I'll to him again in name of BrookHe'll tell me all his purpose: sure, he'll come.
Fear not you that. Go get us propertiesAnd tricking for our fairies.
Let us about it: it is admirable pleasures and feryhonest knaveries.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, Mistress Ford,Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.
I'll to the doctor: he hath my good will, And none but he, to marry with Nan Page. That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot; And he my husband best of all affects. The doctor is well money'd, and his friends Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her, Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin?speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstafffrom Master Slender.
There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go knock and call; hell speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee: knock, I say.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his chamber: I'll be so bold as stay, sir, till she come down; I come to speak with her, indeed.
Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: I'll call. Bully knight! bully Sir John! speak from thy lungs military: art thou there? it is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.
[Above] How now, mine host!
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let her descend; my chambers are honourable: fie! privacy? fie!
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now withme; but she's gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman ofBrentford?
Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell: what would you with her?
My master, sir, Master Slender, sent to her, seeing her go through the streets, to know, sir, whether one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a chain, had the chain or no.
I spake with the old woman about it.
And what says she, I pray, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, she says that the very same man thatbeguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him ofit.
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself;I had other things to have spoken with her too fromhim.
What are they? let us know.
Ay, come; quick.
I may not conceal them, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Conceal them, or thou diest.
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress AnnePage; to know if it were my master's fortune tohave her or no.
'Tis, 'tis his fortune.
What, sir?
To have her, or no. Go; say the woman told me so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]May I be bold to say so, sir?
Ay, sir; like who more bold.
I thank your worship: I shall make my master gladwith these tidings.
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Wasthere a wise woman with thee?
Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath taught me more wit than ever I learned before in my life; and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my learning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Out, alas, sir! cozenage, mere cozenage!
Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs and away, like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.
They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do notsay they be fled; Germans are honest men.
Where is mine host?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is the matter, sir?
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a friend of mine come to town tells me there is three cozen-germans that has cozened all the hosts of Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and money. I tell you for good will, look you: you are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks, and 'tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare you well.
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany: by my trot, dere is no duke dat the court is know to come. I tell you for good vill: adieu.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight. I amundone! Fly, run, hue and cry, villain! I am undone!
I would all the world might be cozened; for I have been cozened and beaten too. If it should come to the ear of the court, how I have been transformed and how my transformation hath been washed and cudgelled, they would melt me out of my fat drop by drop and liquor fishermen's boots with me; I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits till I were as crest-fallen as a dried pear. I never prospered since I forswore myself at primero. Well, if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers, I would repent.
Now, whence come you?
From the two parties, forsooth.
The devil take one party and his dam the other! and so they shall be both bestowed. I have suffered more for their sakes, more than the villanous inconstancy of man's disposition is able to bear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant;speciously one of them; Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you cannot see a white spot about her.
What tellest thou me of black and blue? I was beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow; and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brentford: but that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the action of an old woman, delivered me, the knave constable had set me i' the stocks, i' the common stocks, for a witch.
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber: you shall hear how things go; and, I warrant, to your content. Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good hearts, what ado here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.
Come up into my chamber.
Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy: Iwill give over all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give theeA hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will at theleast keep your counsel.
From time to time I have acquainted you With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page; Who mutually hath answer'd my affection, So far forth as herself might be her chooser, Even to my wish: I have a letter from her Of such contents as you will wonder at; The mirth whereof so larded with my matter, That neither singly can be manifested, Without the show of both; fat Falstaff Hath a great scene: the image of the jest I'll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host. To-night at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one, Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen; The purpose why, is here: in which disguise, While other jests are something rank on foot, Her father hath commanded her to slip Away with Slender and with him at Eton Immediately to marry: she hath consented: Now, sir, Her mother, ever strong against that match And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed That he shall likewise shuffle her away, While other sports are tasking of their minds, And at the deanery, where a priest attends, Straight marry her: to this her mother's plot She seemingly obedient likewise hath Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests: Her father means she shall be all in white, And in that habit, when Slender sees his time To take her by the hand and bid her go, She shall go with him: her mother hath intended, The better to denote her to the doctor, For they must all be mask'd and vizarded, That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed, With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head; And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe, To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token, The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Both, my good host, to go along with me: And here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one, And, in the lawful name of marrying, To give our hearts united ceremony.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar:Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;Besides, I'll make a present recompense.
Prithee, no more prattling; go. I'll hold. This is the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers. Away I go. They say there is divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!
I'll provide you a chain; and I'll do what I can toget you a pair of horns.
Away, I say; time wears: hold up your head, and mince.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter will be known to-night, or never. Be you in the Park about midnight, at Herne's oak, and you shall see wonders.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told meyou had appointed?
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor old man: but I came from her, Master Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master Brook, that ever governed frenzy. I will tell you: he beat me grievously, in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam; because I know also life is a shuttle. I am in haste; go along with me: I'll tell you all, Master Brook. Since I plucked geese, played truant and whipped top, I knew not what 'twas to be beaten till lately. Follow me: I'll tell you strange things of this knave Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged, and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow. Strange things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.
Come, come; we'll couch i' the castle-ditch till we see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter.
Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her and we have a nay-word how to know one another: I come to her in white, and cry 'mum;' she cries 'budget;' and by that we know one another.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's good too: but what needs either your 'mum' or her 'budget?' the white will decipher her well enough. It hath struck ten o'clock.
The night is dark; light and spirits will become it well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns. Let's away; follow me.
Master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you see your time, take her by the band, away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before into the Park: we two must go together.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
Fare you well, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter: but 'tis no matter; better a little chiding than a great deal of heart-break.
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and theWelsh devil Hugh?
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne's oak, with obscured lights; which, at the very instant of Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once display to the night.
That cannot choose but amaze him.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; if he beamazed, he will every way be mocked.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll betray him finely.
Against such lewdsters and their lecheryThose that betray them do no treachery.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts: be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid you: come, come; trib, trib.
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods assist me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa; love set on thy horns. O powerful love! that, in some respects, makes a beast a man, in some other, a man a beast. You were also, Jupiter, a swan for the love of Leda. O omnipotent Love! how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose! A fault done first in the form of a beast. O Jove, a beastly fault! And then another fault in the semblance of a fowl; think on 't, Jove; a foul fault! When gods have hot backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor stag; and the fattest, I think, i' the forest. Send me a cool rut-time, Jove, or who can blame me to piss my tallow? Who comes here? my doe?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir John! art thou there, my deer? my male deer?
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain potatoes; let it thunder to the tune of Green Sleeves, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes; let there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch: I will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk, and my horns I bequeath your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome!
Alas, what noise?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heaven forgive our sins
What should this be?
Away, away!
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the oil that's in me should set hell on fire; he would never else cross me thus.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white, You moonshine revellers and shades of night, You orphan heirs of fixed destiny, Attend your office and your quality. Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys. Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap: Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept, There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry: Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die:I'll wink and couch: no man their works must eye.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said, Raise up the organs of her fantasy; Sleep she as sound as careless infancy: But those as sleep and think not on their sins, Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
About, about; Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out: Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room: That it may stand till the perpetual doom, In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit, Worthy the owner, and the owner it. The several chairs of order look you scour With juice of balm and every precious flower: Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest, With loyal blazon, evermore be blest! And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing, Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring: The expressure that it bears, green let it be, More fertile-fresh than all the field to see; And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white; Let sapphire, pearl and rich embroidery, Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee: Fairies use flowers for their charactery. Away; disperse: but till 'tis one o'clock, Our dance of custom round about the oak Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be, To guide our measure round about the tree. But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest hetransform me to a piece of cheese!
Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end: If he be chaste, the flame will back descend And turn him to no pain; but if he start, It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
A trial, come.
Come, will this wood take fire?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, Oh, Oh!
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire! About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme; And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time. [SONG] Fie on sinful fantasy! Fie on lust and luxury! Lust is but a bloody fire, Kindled with unchaste desire, Fed in heart, whose flames aspire As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher. Pinch him, fairies, mutually; Pinch him for his villany; Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about, Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you nowWill none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives? See you these, husband? do not these fair yokes Become the forest better than the town?
Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook, Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his horns, Master Brook: and, Master Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Master Brook; his horses are arrested for it, Master Brook.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never meet. I will never take you for my love again; but I will always count you my deer.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
Ay, and an ox too: both the proofs are extant.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four times in the thought they were not fairies: and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into a received belief, in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they were fairies. See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent, when 'tis upon ill employment!
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave yourdesires, and fairies will not pinse you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well said, fairy Hugh.
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
I will never mistrust my wife again till thou artable to woo her in good English.
Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it, that it wants matter to prevent so gross o'erreaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too? shall I have a coxcomb of frize? 'Tis time I were choked with a piece of toasted cheese.
Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Seese' and 'putter'! have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm.
Why Sir John, do you think, though we would have thevirtue out of our hearts by the head and shouldersand have given ourselves without scruple to hell,that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
A puffed man?
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as poor as Job?
And as wicked as his wife?
And given to fornications, and to taverns and sackand wine and metheglins, and to drinkings andswearings and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
Well, I am your theme: you have the start of me; I am dejected; I am not able to answer the Welsh flannel; ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me: use me as you will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one Master Brook, that you have cozened of money, to whom you should have been a pander: over and above that you have suffered, I think to repay that money will be a biting affliction.
Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset to-night at my house; where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: tell her Master Slender hath married her daughter.
[Aside] Doctors doubt that: if Anne Page be mydaughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.
Whoa ho! ho, father Page!
Son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dispatched! I'll make the best in Gloucestershireknow on't; would I were hanged, la, else.
Of what, son?
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not been i' the church, I would have swinged him, or he should have swinged me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page, would I might never stir!—and 'tis a postmaster's boy.
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you howyou should know my daughter by her garments?
I went to her in white, and cried 'mum,' and she cried 'budget,' as Anne and I had appointed; and yet it was not Anne, but a postmaster's boy.
Good George, be not angry: I knew of your purpose; turned my daughter into green; and, indeed, she is now with the doctor at the deanery, and there married.
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha' married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy; it is not Anne Page: by gar, I am cozened.
Why, did you take her in green?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, by gar, and 'tis a boy: by gar, I'll raise all Windsor.
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
How now, Master Fenton!
Pardon, good father! good my mother, pardon!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?
Why went you not with master doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it. You would have married her most shamefully, Where there was no proportion held in love. The truth is, she and I, long since contracted, Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us. The offence is holy that she hath committed; And this deceit loses the name of craft, Of disobedience, or unduteous title, Since therein she doth evitate and shun A thousand irreligious cursed hours, Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy:In love the heavens themselves do guide the state;Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand tostrike at me, that your arrow hath glanced.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.
Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton, Heaven give you many, many merry days! Good husband, let us every one go home, And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire; Sir John and all.
Let it be so. Sir John,To Master Brook you yet shall hold your wordFor he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
I’ll pheeze you, in faith.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A pair of stocks, you rogue!
Y'are a baggage, the Slys are no rogues. Look in the chronicles—we came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore paucas pallabris : let the world slide. Sessa!
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy. Go to thy coldbed and warm thee.
I know my remedy. I must go fetch the thirdborough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I’ll answer him by law.I’ll not budge an inch, boy. Let him come, and kindly.
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds. Breathe Merriman, the poor cur is embossed, And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach. Saw’st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault? I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord. He cried upon it at the merest loss, And twice today picked out the dullest scent. Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet, I would esteem him worth a dozen such. But sup them well and look unto them all. Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
I will, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale,This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image! Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man. What think you: if he were conveyed to bed, Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, A most delicious banquet by his bed, And brave attendants near him when he wakes, Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy. Then take him up and manage well the jest. Carry him gently to my fairest chamber And hang it round with all my wanton pictures. Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. Procure me music ready when he wakes, To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound. And if he chance to speak, be ready straight And with a low submissive reverence Say, “What is it your Honor will command?” Let one attend him with a silver basin Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers, Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, And say, “Will ’t please your Lordship cool your hands?” Someone be ready with a costly suit And ask him what apparel he will wear. Another tell him of his hounds and horse, And that his lady mourns at his disease. Persuade him that he hath been lunatic, And when he says he is, say that he dreams, For he is nothing but a mighty lord. This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs. It will be pastime passing excellent If it be husbanded with modesty.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our partAs he shall think by our true diligenceHe is no less than what we say he is.
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet ’tis that sounds.
Belike some noble gentleman that means,Traveling some journey, to repose him here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now! who is it?
An’t please your Honor, playersThat offer service to your Lordship.
Bid them come near.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.
We thank your Honor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember Since once he played a farmer’s eldest son. 'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well. I have forgot your name, but sure that part Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
I think ’twas Soto that your Honor means.
'Tis very true. Thou didst it excellent. Well, you are come to me in happy time, The rather for I have some sport in hand Wherein your cunning can assist me much. There is a lord will hear you play tonight; But I am doubtful of your modesties, Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior— For yet his Honor never heard a play— You break into some merry passion And so offend him. For I tell you, sirs, If you should smile, he grows impatient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselvesWere he the veriest antic in the world.
Go, sirrah, take them to the butteryAnd give them friendly welcome every one. Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol’mew, my page, And see him dressed in all suits like a lady. That done, conduct him to the drunkard’s chamber And call him “madam,” do him obeisance. Tell him from me, as he will win my love, He bear himself with honorable action, Such as he hath observed in noble ladies Unto their lords, by them accomplishèd. Such duty to the drunkard let him do With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy, And say, “What is ’t your Honor will command, Wherein your lady and your humble wife May show her duty and make known her love?” And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, And with declining head into his bosom, Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed To see her noble lord restored to health, Who for this seven years hath esteemed him No better than a poor and loathsome beggar. And if the boy have not a woman’s gift To rain a shower of commanded tears, An onion will do well for such a shift, Which in a napkin being close conveyed Shall in despite enforce a watery eye. See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst:Anon I’ll give thee more instructions.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace, Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman. I long to hear him call the drunkard “husband,” And how my men will stay themselves from laughter When they do homage to this simple peasant. I’ll in to counsel them. Haply my presence May well abate the over-merry spleen Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
For God’s sake, a pot of small ale.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Will ’t please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?
Will ’t please your Honor taste of these conserves?
What raiment will your Honor wear today?
I am Christophero Sly. Call not me “Honor” nor “Lordship.” I ne'er drank sack in my life. An if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment I’ll wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor nomore shoes than feet, nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.
Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor! Oh, that a mighty man of such descent, Of such possessions and so high esteem, Should be infusèd with so foul a spirit!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old Sly’s son of Burton Heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot, if she know me not! If she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying’st knave in Christendom. What!I am not bestraught! Here’s—
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house, As beaten hence by your strange lunacy. O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth, Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment, And banish hence these abject lowly dreams. Look how thy servants do attend on thee, Each in his office ready at thy beck. Wilt thou have music? Hark! Apollo plays,
And twenty cagèd nightingales do sing: Or wilt thou sleep? We’ll have thee to a couch Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis. Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground. Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped, Their harness studded all with gold and pearl. Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt? Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say thou wilt course. Thy greyhounds are as swiftAs breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight Adonis painted by a running brook And Cytherea all in sedges hid, Which seem to move and wanton with her breath, Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
We’ll show thee Io as she was a maidAnd how she was beguileèd and surprised,As lively painted as the deed was done.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood, Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep, So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. Thou hast a lady far more beautifulThan any woman in this waning age.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And till the tears that she hath shed for theeLike envious floods o'errun her lovely face,She was the fairest creature in the world— And yet she is inferior to none.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady? Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now? I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak. I smell sweet savors and I feel soft things. Upon my life, I am a lord indeed And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly. Well, bring our lady hither to our sight, And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
Will ’t please your Mightiness to wash your hands? O, how we joy to see your wit restored! O, that once more you knew but what you are! These fifteen years you have been in a dream Or, when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap. But did I never speak of all that time?
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words. For though you lay here in this goodly chamber, Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door; And rail upon the hostess of the house, And say you would present her at the leet, Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts. Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, the woman’s maid of the house.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid, Nor no such men as you have reckoned up, As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece, And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell, And twenty more such names and men as these, Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
Amen.
I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How fares my noble lord?
Marry, I fare well,For here is cheer enough. Where is my wife?
Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?
Are you my wife and will not call me “husband”?My men should call me “lord.” I am your goodman.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband,I am your wife in all obedience.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it well.—What must I call her?
“Madam.”
“Alice Madam,” or “Joan Madam”?
“Madam,” and nothing else. So lords call ladies.
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamedAnd slept above some fifteen year or more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
'Tis much.—Servants, leave me and her alone.Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you To pardon me yet for a night or two, Or if not so, until the sun be set. For your physicians have expressly charged, In peril to incur your former malady, That I should yet absent me from your bed. I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But Iwould be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.
Your Honor’s players, hearing your amendment, Are come to play a pleasant comedy, For so your doctors hold it very meet, Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. Therefore they thought it good you hear a play And frame your mind to mirth and merriment, Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, I will. Let them play it. Is not a comonty aChristmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
What, household stuff?
It is a kind of history.
Well, we’ll see ’t. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. We shall ne'er be younger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tranio, since for the great desire I had To see fair Padua, nursery of arts, I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy, The pleasant garden of great Italy, And by my father’s love and leave am armed With his goodwill and thy good company. My trusty servant, well approved in all, Here let us breathe and haply institute A course of learning and ingenious studies. Pisa, renownèd for grave citizens, Gave me my being and my father first, A merchant of great traffic through the world, Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii. Vincentio’s son, brought up in Florence, It shall become to serve all hopes conceived To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds. And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study Virtue, and that part of philosophy Will I apply that treats of happiness By virtue specially to be achieved. Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa leftAnd am to Padua come, as he that leaves A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine. I am in all affected as yourself, Glad that you thus continue your resolve To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. Only, good master, while we do admire This virtue and this moral discipline, Let’s be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray, Or so devote to Aristotle’s checks As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured. Balk logic with acquaintance that you have, And practice rhetoric in your common talk; Music and poesy use to quicken you; The mathematics and the metaphysics— Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you. No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en. In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise. If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore, We could at once put us in readiness And take a lodging fit to entertain Such friends as time in Padua shall beget. But stay awhile. What company is this?
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther, For how I firmly am resolved you know— That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter Before I have a husband for the elder. If either of you both love Katherina,Because I know you well and love you wellLeave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To cart her, rather. She’s too rough for me.—There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
[To BAPTISTA] I pray you, sir, is it your willTo make a stale of me amongst these mates?
“Mates,” maid? how mean you that? No mates for you Unless you were of gentler, milder mold.
I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear. I wis it is not halfway to her heart. But if it were, doubt not her care should be To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool And paint your face and use you like a fool.
From all such devils, good Lord, deliver us!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And me too, good Lord!
[aside to LUCENTIO ] Husht, master, here’s some good pastime toward.That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
[aside to TRANIO ] But in the other’s silence do I seeMaid’s mild behavior and sobriety.Peace, Tranio.
[aside to LUCENTIO ] Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.
[To GREMIO and HORTENSIO ] Gentlemen, that I may soon make good What I have said—Bianca, get you in,And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A pretty peat! It is bestPut finger in the eye, an she knew why.
Sister, content you in my discontent.— Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe. My books and instruments shall be my company,On them to look and practice by myself.
Hark, Tranio! Thou may’st hear Minerva speak.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?Sorry am I that our goodwill effectsBianca’s grief.
Why will you mew her up,Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hellAnd make her bear the penance of her tongue?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gentlemen, content ye. I am resolved.—Go in, Bianca.
And for I know she taketh most delight In music, instruments, and poetry, Schoolmasters will I keep within my house, Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio, Or, Signior Gremio, you know any such, Prefer them hither, for to cunning men I will be very kind, and liberal To mine own children in good bringing up. And so farewell.—Katherina, you may stay,For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, shall Ibe appointed hours as though, belike, I knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
You may go to the devil’s dam! Your gifts are so good here’s none will hold you. —Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out. Our cake’s dough on both sides. Farewell. Yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.
So will I, Signior Gremio. But a word, I pray. Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in Bianca’s love, to labor and effect one thing specially.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What’s that, I pray?
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
A husband? A devil!
I say a husband.
I say a devil. Think’st thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tush, Gremio. Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellowsin the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
I cannot tell. But I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.
Faith, as you say, there’s small choice in rotten apples. But come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping Baptista’s eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to’t afresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He thatruns fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signior Gremio?
I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possibleThat love should of a sudden take such hold?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O Tranio, till I found it to be true, I never thought it possible or likely. But see, while idly I stood looking on, I found the effect of love in idleness And now in plainness do confess to thee That art to me as secret and as dear As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was, Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio, If I achieve not this young modest girl. Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst. Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now. Affection is not rated from the heart. If love have touched you, naught remains but so: Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
Gramercies, lad, go forward. This contents.The rest will comfort, for thy counsel’s sound.
Master, you looked so longly on the maid, Perhaps you marked not what’s the pith of all.
Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face Such as the daughter of Agenor had, That made great Jove to humble him to her hand When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sisterBegan to scold and raise up such a stormThat mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to moveAnd with her breath she did perfume the air. Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
[aside] Nay, then, ’tis time to stir him from his trance.— I pray, awake, sir! If you love the maid, Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands: Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd That till the father rid his hands of her, Master, your love must live a maid at home, And therefore has he closely mewed her up, Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father’s he! But art thou not advised, he took some careTo get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now ’tis plotted!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have it, Tranio!
Master, for my hand,Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first.
You will be schoolmasterAnd undertake the teaching of the maid:That’s your device.
It is. May it be done?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not possible. For who shall bear your part And be in Padua here Vincentio’s son, Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
Basta, content thee, for I have it full. We have not yet been seen in any house, Nor can we be distinguished by our faces For man or master. Then it follows thus: Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead, Keep house and port and servants as I should. I will some other be, some Florentine, Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa. 'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
So had you need. In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is, And I am tied to be obedient— For so your father charged me at our parting, "Be serviceable to my son," quoth he, Although I think 'twas in another sense— I am content to be Lucentio Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,And let me be a slave t'achieve that maidWhose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
Where have I been? Nay, how now, where are you? Master,has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or you stolenhis? Or both? Pray, what’s the news?
Sirrah, come hither: ’tis no time to jest, And therefore frame your manners to the time. Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life, Puts my apparel and my countenance on, And I for my escape have put on his; For in a quarrel since I came ashore I killed a man and fear I was descried. Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes, While I make way from hence to save my life. You understand me?
Aye, sir. [aside] Ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of “Tranio” in your mouth. Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The better for him. Would I were so too.
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after, That Lucentio indeed had Baptista’s youngest daughter. But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master’s, I advise You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies. When I am alone, why then I am Tranio; But in all places else, your master Lucentio.
Tranio, let’s go. One thing more rests, that thyself execute, To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why, Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely. Comes there any more of it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, ’tis but begun.
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. Would’twere done.
Verona, for a while I take my leave, To see my friends in Padua, but of all My best belovèd and approvèd friend, Hortensio. And I trow this is his house. Here, sirrah Grumio. Knock, I say.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your Worship?
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?
Villain, I say, knock me at this gateAnd rap me well, or I’ll knock your knave’s pate.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Will it not be?Faith, sirrah, an you’ll not knock, I’ll ring it.I’ll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
Help, mistress, help! My master is mad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain.
How now, what’s the matter? My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray? Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato, may I say.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.—Rise, Grumio, rise. We will compound this quarrel.
Nay, ’tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service —look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? Whom, would to God, I had well knocked at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A senseless villain, good Hortensio. I bade the rascal knock upon your gateAnd could not get him for my heart to do it.
Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these wordsplain: “Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly”? And come you now with “knocking at the gate”?
Sirrah, begone or talk not, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience. I am Grumio’s pledge. Why, this' a heavy chance ’twixt him and you, Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio. And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world To seek their fortunes farther than at home, Where small experience grows. But in a few, Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me: Antonio, my father, is deceased, And I have thrust myself into this maze, Happily to wive and thrive as best I may. Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home, And so am come abroad to see the world.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee And wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favored wife? Thou’dst thank me but a little for my counsel; And yet I’ll promise thee she shall be rich, And very rich. But thou'rt too much my friend, And I’ll not wish thee to her.
Signior Hortensio, ’twixt such friends as we Few words suffice. And therefore, if thou know One rich enough to be Petruchio’s wife, As wealth is burden of my wooing dance, Be she as foul as was Florentius' love, As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse, She moves me not, or not removes at least Affection’s edge in me, were she as rough As are the swelling Adriatic seas. I come to wive it wealthily in Padua; If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
[To HORTENSIO] Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatlywhat his mind is. Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses. Why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in, I will continue that I broached in jest. I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife With wealth enough, and young and beauteous, Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman. Her only fault, and that is faults enough, Is that she is intolerable curst, And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure That, were my state far worser than it is, I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
Hortensio, peace. Thou know’st not gold’s effect. Tell me her father’s name, and ’tis enough; For I will board her, though she chide as loud As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her father is Baptista Minola, An affable and courteous gentleman. Her name is Katherina Minola, Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her, And he knew my deceasèd father well. I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her, And therefore let me be thus bold with you To give you over at this first encounter, Unless you will accompany me thither.
[To HORTENSIO] I pray you, sir, let him go while the humor lasts. O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so.Why, that’s nothing; an he begin once, he’ll rail in his rope tricks. I’ll tell you what sir: an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face andso disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee, For in Baptista’s keep my treasure is. He hath the jewel of my life in hold, His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca, And her withholds from me and other more, Suitors to her and rivals in my love, Supposing it a thing impossible, For those defects I have before rehearsed, That ever Katherina will be wooed. Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en, That none shall have access unto Bianca Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
“Katherine the curst!”A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace, And offer me disguised in sober robes To old Baptista as a schoolmaster Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca, That so I may, by this device at least, Have leave and leisure to make love to her And, unsuspected, court her by herself.
Here’s no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!
Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?
Peace, Grumio. It is the rival of my love.Petruchio, stand by a while.
[aside] A proper stripling, and an amorous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To LUCENTIO] O, very well, I have perused the note. Hark you, sir: I’ll have them very fairly bound, All books of love. See that at any hand, And see you read no other lectures to her. You understand me. Over and beside Signior Baptista’s liberality, I’ll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too. And let me have them very well perfum’d For she is sweeter than perfume itself To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
[as CAMBIO] Whate'er I read to her, I’ll plead for you As for my patron, stand you so assured, As firmly as yourself were still in place, Yea, and perhaps with more successful wordsThan you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
O this learning, what a thing it is!
[aside] O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
[aside] Peace, sirrah.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio. Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola. I promised to enquire carefully About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca, And by good fortune I have lighted well On this young man, for learning and behavior Fit for her turn, well read in poetry And other books—good ones, I warrant ye.
'Tis well. And I have met a gentleman Hath promised me to help me to another, A fine musician to instruct our mistress. So shall I no whit be behind in duty To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
[aside] And that his bags shall prove.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Gremio, ’tis now no time to vent our love. Listen to me, and if you speak me fair, I’ll tell you news indifferent good for either. [presenting PETRUCHIO ] Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met, Upon agreement from us to his liking, Will undertake to woo curst Katherine, Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
So said, so done, is well.Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
No? Say’st me so, friend? What countryman?
Born in Verona, old Antonio’s son.My father dead, my fortune lives for me.And I do hope good days and long to see.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O sir, such a life with such a wife were strange! But if you have a stomach, to ’t, i' God’s name: You shall have me assisting you in all. But will you woo this wildcat?
Will I live?
Will he woo her? Ay, or I’ll hang her.
Why came I hither but to that intent? Think you a little din can daunt mine ears? Have I not in my time heard lions roar? Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds, Rage like an angry boar chafèd with sweat? Have I not heard great ordnance in the field, And heaven’s artillery thunder in the skies? Have I not in a pitchèd battle heard Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang? And do you tell me of a woman’s tongue That gives not half so great a blow to hear As will a chestnut in a farmer’s fire? Tush, tush! Fear boys with bugs.
For he fears none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hortensio, hark.This gentleman is happily arrived,My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
I promised we would be contributorsAnd bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
[as LUCENTIO] Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest wayTo the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He that has the two fair daughters—is ’t he you mean?
[as LUCENTIO] Even he, Biondello.
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to—
[as LUCENTIO] Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let’s away.
[aside] Well begun, Tranio.
Sir, a word ere you go. Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
An if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No, if without more words you will get you hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free For me as for you?
But so is not she.
For what reason, I beseech you?
For this reason, if you’ll know:That she’s the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That she’s the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Softly, my masters. If you be gentlemen, Do me this right: hear me with patience. Baptista is a noble gentleman, To whom my father is not all unknown, And were his daughter fairer than she is, She may more suitors have, and me for one. Fair Leda’s daughter had a thousand wooers; Then well one more may fair Bianca have. And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one, Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
What! This gentleman will out-talk us all.
[as CAMBIO] Sir, give him head; I know he’ll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
[To TRANIO] Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,Did you yet ever see Baptista’s daughter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two, The one as famous for a scolding tongueAs is the other for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first’s for me; let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
[To TRANIO] Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth: The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for, Her father keeps from all access of suitors And will not promise her to any man Until the elder sister first be wed. The younger then is free, and not before.
[as LUCENTIO] If it be so, sir, that you are the man Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest, And if you break the ice and do this feat, Achieve the elder, set the younger free For our access, whose hap shall be to have her Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive. And since you do profess to be a suitor, You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman, To whom we all rest generally beholding.
[as LUCENTIO] Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof, Please ye we may contrive this afternoon And quaff carouses to our mistress' health And do as adversaries do in law, Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
O excellent motion! Fellows, let’s be gone.
The motion’s good indeed and be it so.—Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
Good sister, wrong me not nor wrong yourself, To make a bondmaid and a slave of me. That I disdain. But for these other goods— Unbind my hands, I’ll pull them off myself, Yea, all my raiment to my petticoat, Or what you will command me will I do, So well I know my duty to my elders.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tellWhom thou lovest best. See thou dissemble not.
Believe me, sister, of all the men aliveI never yet beheld that special faceWhich I could fancy more than any other.
Minion, thou liest. Is ’t not Hortensio?
If you affect him, sister, here I swear I’ll plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
Oh, then belike you fancy riches more.You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it for him you do envy me so? Nay, then you jest, and now I well perceive You have but jested with me all this while. I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?— Bianca, stand aside.—Poor girl, she weeps! [To BIANCA] Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her. [To KATHERINE] For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit! Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and I’ll be revenged.
What, in my sight?—Bianca, get thee in.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see She is your treasure, she must have a husband, I must dance barefoot on her wedding day And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell. Talk not to me. I will go sit and weep Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?But who comes here?
Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.
Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.—God save you, gentlemen!
And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughterCalled Katherina, fair and virtuous?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.
[To PETRUCHIO] You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio. Give me leave.— I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, That hearing of her beauty and her wit, Her affability and bashful modesty, Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior, Am bold to show myself a forward guest Within your house, to make mine eye the witness Of that report which I so oft have heard. And, for an entrance to my entertainment, I do present you with a man of mine, [presenting HORTENSIO , disguised as LITIO ] Cunning in music and the mathematics, To instruct her fully in those sciences, Whereof I know she is not ignorant. Accept of him, or else you do me wrong. His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
You’re welcome, sir, and he for your good sake.But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
I see you do not mean to part with her, Or else you like not of my company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistake me not. I speak but as I find.Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name, Antonio’s son,A man well known throughout all Italy.
I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I prayLet us that are poor petitioners speak too. Bacare, you are marvelous forward.
Oh, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing.— [To BAPTISTA ] Neighbor, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar [presenting LUCENTIO , disguised as CAMBIO ] that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept his service.
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio. [To TRANIO as LUCENTIO ] But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
[as LUCENTIO] Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own, That being a stranger in this city here Do make myself a suitor to your daughter, Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous. Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, In the preferment of the eldest sister. This liberty is all that I request, That, upon knowledge of my parentage, I may have welcome ’mongst the rest that woo And free access and favor as the rest. And toward the education of your daughters, I here bestow a simple instrument And this small packet of Greek and Latin books. [BIONDELLO b rings the gifts forward] If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Lucentio is your name. Of whence, I pray?
[as LUCENTIO] Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A mighty man of Pisa. By report I know him well. You are very welcome, sir. [To HORTENSIO as LITIO ] Take you the lute, [To LUCENTIO as CAMBIO ] and you the set of books. You shall go see your pupils presently. Holla, within!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemenTo my daughters, and tell them bothThese are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard, And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste, And every day I cannot come to woo. You knew my father well, and in him me, Left solely heir to all his lands and goods, Which I have bettered rather than decreased. Then tell me, if I get your daughter’s love, What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
After my death, the one half of my lands, And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And, for that dowry, I’ll assure her of Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, In all my lands and leases whatsoever. Let specialties be therefore drawn between us, That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,That is, her love, for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing. For I tell you, father, I am as peremptory as she proud-minded; And where two raging fires meet together, They do consume the thing that feeds their fury. Though little fire grows great with little wind, Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all. So I to her and so she yields to me, For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed.But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
[as LITIO] For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
I think she’ll sooner prove a soldier.Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me. I did but tell her she mistook her frets, And bowed her hand to teach her fingering, When, with a most impatient devilish spirit, “'Frets' call you these?” quoth she. “I’ll fume with them!” And with that word she struck me on the head, And through the instrument my pate made way, And there I stood amazèd for a while As on a pillory, looking through the lute, While she did call me “rascal fiddler” And “twangling Jack”; with twenty such vile terms, As had she studied to misuse me so.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench.I love her ten times more than e'er I did. O, how I long to have some chat with her!
[To HORTENSIO as LITIO] Well, go with me and be not so discomfited. Proceed in practice with my younger daughter. She’s apt to learn and thankful for good turns. Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
I pray you do.
I’ll attend her here And woo her with some spirit when she comes. Say that she rail; why then I’ll tell her plain She sings as sweetly as a nightingale. Say that she frown; I’ll say she looks as clear As morning roses newly washed with dew. Say she be mute and will not speak a word; Then I’ll commend her volubility, And say she uttereth piercing eloquence. If she do bid me pack, I’ll give her thanks, As though she bid me stay by her a week. If she deny to wed, I’ll crave the day When I shall ask the banns and when be marrièd. But here she comes—and now, Petruchio, speak.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, Kate—for that’s your name, I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate, And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst, But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom, Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate— For dainties are all Kates —and therefore, Kate, Take this of me, Kate of my consolation: Hearing thy mildness praised in every town, Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded— Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs— Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
“Moved,” in good time. Let him that moved you hitherRemove you hence. I knew you at the firstYou were a moveable.
Why, what’s a moveable?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A joint stool.
Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee,For knowing thee to be but young and light—
Too light for such a swain as you to catch,And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
“Should be”—should buzz!
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp. I' faith, you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?In his tail.
In his tongue.
Whose tongue?
Yours, if you talk of tales. And so farewell.
What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again,Good Kate. I am a gentleman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I’ll try.
I swear I’ll cuff you if you strike again.
So may you lose your arms.If you strike me, you are no gentleman;And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
A herald, Kate? Oh, put me in thy books!
What is your crest? A coxcomb?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.
Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
Why, here’s no crab, and therefore look not sour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There is, there is.
Then show it me.
Had I a glass, I would.
What, you mean my face?
Well aimed of such a young one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
Yet you are withered.
'Tis with cares.
I care not.
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you ’scape not so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I chafe you, if I tarry. Let me go.
No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle. 'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen, And now I find report a very liar. For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous, But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers. Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance, Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will, Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk. But thou with mildness entertain’st thy wooers, With gentle conference, soft and affable. Why does the world report that Kate doth limp? O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig As hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels. Oh, let me see thee walk! Thou dost not halt.
Go, fool, and whom thou keep’st command.
Did ever Dian so become a grove As Kate this chamber with her princely gait? Oh, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate, And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is extempore, from my mother wit.
A witty mother! Witless else her son.
Am I not wise?
Yes, keep you warm.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed. And therefore, setting all this chat aside, Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented That you shall be my wife, your dowry 'greed on, And, will you, nill you, I will marry you. Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn, For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty, Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well, Thou must be married to no man but me. For I am he am born to tame you, Kate, And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate Conformable as other household Kates.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes your father. Never make denial.I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
How but well, sir? How but well? It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine? In your dumps?
Call you me daughter? Now, I promise you You have showed a tender fatherly regard To wish me wed to one half lunatic, A madcup ruffian and a swearing Jack, That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Father, ’tis thus: yourself and all the world That talked of her have talked amiss of her. If she be curst, it is for policy, For she’s not froward, but modest as the dove. She is not hot, but temperate as the morn. For patience she will prove a second Grissel, And Roman Lucrece for her chastity. And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together, That upon Sunday is the wedding day.
I’ll see thee hanged on Sunday first.
Hark, Petruchio: she says she’ll see thee hanged first.
Is this your speeding? Nay, then, good night our part.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself. If she and I be pleased, what’s that to you? 'Tis bargained ’twixt us twain, being alone, That she shall still be curst in company. I tell you, ’tis incredible to believe How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate! She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath, That in a twink she won me to her love. O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see, How tame, when men and women are alone, A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.— Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day. Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests. I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not what to say, but give me your hands.God send you joy, Petruchio. 'Tis a match.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu. I will to Venice. Sunday comes apace. We will have rings, and things, and fine array, And kiss me, Kate. We will be married o' Sunday.
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant’s part,And venture madly on a desperate mart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] 'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you.'Twill bring you gain or perish on the seas.
The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch. But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter. Now is the day we long have lookèd for. I am your neighbor, and was suitor first.
[as LUCENTIO] And I am one that love Bianca moreThan words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
But thine doth fry.Skipper, stand back. 'Tis age that nourisheth.
[as LUCENTIO] But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife. 'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both That can assure my daughter greatest dower Shall have my Bianca’s love. Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the city Is richly furnishèd with plate and gold, Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands; My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry, In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns, In cypress chests my arras counterpoints, Costly apparel, tents, and canopies, Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl, Valance of Venice gold in needlework, Pewter and brass, and all things that belong To house or housekeeping. Then, at my farm I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, And all things answerable to this portion. Myself am struck in years, I must confess, And if I die tomorrow this is hers, If whilst I live she will be only mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER](as LUCENTIO] That “only” came well in. [To BAPTISTA] Sir, list to me: I am my father’s heir and only son. If I may have your daughter to my wife, I’ll leave her houses three or four as good, Within rich Pisa walls, as any one Old Signior Gremio has in Padua, Besides two thousand ducats by the year Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.— What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land! [aside] My land amounts not to so much in all.— That she shall have, besides an argosy That now is lying in Marcellus' road. [To TRANIO] What, have I choked you with an argosy?
[as LUCENTIO] Gremio, ’tis known my father hath no less Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses, And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her, And twice as much whate'er thou offer’st next.
Nay, I have offered all, I have no more,And she can have no more than all I have. [To BAPTISTA] If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
[as LUCENTIO] Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,By your firm promise. Gremio is outvied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must confess your offer is the best, And, let your father make her the assurance, She is your own; else, you must pardon me. If you should die before him, where’s her dower?
[as LUCENTIO] That’s but a cavil: he is old, I young.
And may not young men die as well as old?
Well, gentlemen, I am thus resolved. On Sunday next, you know My daughter Katherina is to be married. [To TRANIO as LUCENTIO ] Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca Be bride to you, if you make this assurance. If not, to Signior Gremio. And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu, good neighbor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now I fear thee not. Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool To give thee all and in his waning age Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy! An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide! Yet I have faced it with a card of ten. 'Tis in my head to do my master good. I see no reason but supposed Lucentio Must get a father, called “supposed Vincentio”— And that’s a wonder. Fathers commonly Do get their children. But in this case of wooing, A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
[as CAMBIO] Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir.Have you so soon forgot the entertainmentHer sister Katherina welcomed you withal?
[as LITIO] But, wrangling pedant, this is The patroness of heavenly harmony. Then give me leave to have prerogative, And when in music we have spent an hour, Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
[as CAMBIO] Preposterous ass, that never read so far To know the cause why music was ordained. Was it not to refresh the mind of man After his studies or his usual pain? Then give me leave to read philosophy And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LITIO] Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong To strive for that which resteth in my choice. I am no breeching scholar in the schools. I’ll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times But learn my lessons as I please myself. And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down. [To HORTENSIO] Take you your instrument, play you the whiles. His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
[as LITIO] You’ll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
[aside] That will be never. [To HORTENSIO] Tune your instrument.
Where left we last?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here, madam: Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus, Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
Construe them.
Hic ibat , as I told you before, Simois , I am Lucentio, hic est , son unto Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeia tellus , disguised thus to get your love, Hic steterat , and that “Lucentio” that comes a-wooing, Priami is my man Tranio, regia , bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
[as LITIO] Madam, my instrument’s in tune.
Let’s hear. [he plays] O fie! The treble jars.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as CAMBIO] Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Now let me see if I can construe it. Hic ibat Simois , I know you not, hic est Sigeia tellus , I trust you not, Hic steterat Priami , take heed he hear us not, regia , presume not, celsa senis, despair not.
[as LITIO] Madam, ’tis now in tune.
[as CAMBIO] All but the base.
[as LITIO] The base is right; ’tis the base knave that jars. [aside] How fiery and forward our pedant is! Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love. Pedascule , I’ll watch you better yet.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To LUCENTIO] In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not, for sure AeacidesWas Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you, I should be arguing still upon that doubt. But let it rest.—Now, Litio, to you. Good master, take it not unkindly, pray, That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
[as LITIO , to LUCENTIO] You may go walk, and give me leave awhile.My lessons make no music in three parts.
[as CAMBIO] Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait. [aside] And watch withal, for, but I be deceived,Our fine musician groweth amorous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LITIO] Madam, before you touch the instrument, To learn the order of my fingering I must begin with rudiments of art, To teach you gamut in a briefer sort, More pleasant, pithy, and effectual Than hath been taught by any of my trade. And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
[reads] “ Gamut I am, the ground of all accord: A re, to plead Hortensio’s passion; B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord, C fa ut, that loves with all affection; D sol re, one clef, two notes have I; E la mi, show pity, or I die.” Call you this “gamut”? Tut, I like it not. Old fashions please me best. I am not so nice To change true rules for old inventions.
Mistress, your father prays you leave your booksAnd help to dress your sister’s chamber up.You know tomorrow is the wedding day.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.
[as CAMBIO] Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant. Methinks he looks as though he were in love. Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale, Seize thee that list! If once I find thee ranging, Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
[To TRANIO] Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day That Katherine and Petruchio should be married, And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. What will be said? What mockery will it be, To want the bridegroom when the priest attends To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced To give my hand, opposed against my heart, Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen, Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure. I told you, I, he was a frantic fool, Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior, And, to be noted for a merry man, He’ll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage, Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns, Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed. Now must the world point at poor Katherine And say, “Lo, there is mad Petruchio’s wife, If it would please him come and marry her!”
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too. Upon my life, Petruchio means but well, Whatever fortune stays him from his word: Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise; Though he be merry, yet withal he’s honest.
Would Katherine had never seen him, though!
Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep,For such an injury would vex a very saint,Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
Master, master! News, old news, and such news as you never heard of!
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio’s coming?
Is he come?
Why, no, sir.
What then?
He is coming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When will he be here?
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
[as LUCENTIO] But say, what to thine old news?
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair of boots that have been candle cases, one buckled, another laced; an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory, with a broken hilt and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred, besides possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legged before and with a half-checked bit and a headstall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hathbeen often burst, and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a woman’s crupper of velour,which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
Who comes with him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat and the humor of forty fancies pricked in ’t for a feather. A monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentleman’s lackey.
[as LUCENTIO] 'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion,Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.
I am glad he’s come, howsoe'er he comes.
Why, sir, he comes not.
Didst thou not say he comes?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who? That Petruchio came?
Ay, that Petruchio came.
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Why, that’s all one.
Nay, by Saint Jamy, I hold you a penny,A horse and a manIs more than oneAnd yet not many.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, where be these gallants? Who’s at home?
You are welcome, sir.
And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.
[as LUCENTIO] Not so well appareled as I wish you were.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Were it better I should rush in thus— But where is Kate? Where is my love? How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown. And wherefore gaze this goodly company As if they saw some wondrous monument, Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day. First were we sad, fearing you would not come, Now sadder that you come so unprovided. Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate, An eyesore to our solemn festival.
And tell us what occasion of importHath all so long detained you from your wifeAnd sent you hither so unlike yourself.
Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear. Sufficeth I am come to keep my word, Though in some part enforcèd to digress,Which, at more leisure, I will so excuseAs you shall well be satisfied withal.But where is Kate? I stay too long from her.The morning wears. 'Tis time we were at church.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes.Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not I, believe me. Thus I’ll visit her.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Good sooth, even thus. Therefore, ha' done with words: To me she’s married, not unto my clothes. Could I repair what she will wear in me As I can change these poor accoutrements, 'Twere well for Kate and better for myself. But what a fool am I to chat with you, When I should bid good morrow to my bride And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.We will persuade him, be it possible,To put on better ere he go to church.
I’ll after him, and see the event of this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But sir, to love concerneth us to add Her father’s liking, which to bring to pass, As I before unparted to your worship, I am to get a man—whate'er he be It skills not much, we’ll fit him to our turn— And he shall be “Vincentio of Pisa” And make assurance here in Padua Of greater sums than I have promisèd. So shall you quietly enjoy your hope And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster Doth watch Bianca’s steps so narrowly, 'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage, Which, once performed, let all the world say no, I’ll keep mine own despite of all the world.
That by degrees we mean to look into And watch our vantage in this business. We’ll overreach the graybeard, Gremio, The narrow-prying father, Minola, The quaint musician, amorous Litio, All for my master’s sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
[as LUCENTIO] Curster than she? Why, ’tis impossible.
Why, he’s a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
[as LUCENTIO] Why, she’s a devil, a devil, the devil’s dam.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tut, she’s a lamb, a dove, a fool to him! I’ll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest Should ask if Katherine should be his wife, “Ay, by gogs wouns!” quoth he, and swore so loud That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book, And as he stooped again to take it up, The mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff That down fell priest and book, and book and priest. “Now take them up,” quoth he, “if any list.”
[as LUCENTIO] What said the wench when he rose again?
Trembled and shook, for why he stamped and swore As if the vicar meant to cozen him. But after many ceremonies done, He calls for wine. “A health!” quoth he, as if He had been aboard, carousing to his mates After a storm; quaffed off the muscatel And threw the sops all in the sexton’s face, Having no other reason But that his beard grew thin and hungerly And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking. This done, he took the bride about the neck And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack That at the parting all the church did echo. And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame, And after me, I know, the rout is coming. Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for you I know you think to dine with me today And have prepared great store of wedding cheer, But so it is, my haste doth call me hence, And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is ’t possible you will away tonight?
I must away today, before night come. Make it no wonder. If you knew my business, You would entreat me rather go than stay. And, honest company, I thank you all, That have beheld me give away myself To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife. Dine with my father, drink a health to me, For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
[as LUCENTIO] Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
It may not be.
Let me entreat you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It cannot be.
Let me entreat you.
I am content.
Are you content to stay?
I am content you shall entreat me stay,But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, if you love me, stay.
Grumio, my horse.
Ay, sir, they be ready. The oats have eaten the horses.
Nay, then, Do what thou canst, I will not go today, No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself. The door is open, sir. There lies your way. You may be jogging whiles your boots are green. For me, I’ll not be gone till I please myself. 'Tis like you’ll prove a jolly surly groom, That take it on you at the first so roundly.
O Kate, content thee. Prithee, be not angry.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will be angry. What hast thou to do?—Father, be quiet. He shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.I see a woman may be made a foolIf she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.— Obey the bride, you that attend on her. Go to the feast, revel and domineer, Carouse full measure to her maidenhead, Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves. But for my bonny Kate, she must with me. Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret; I will be master of what is mine own. She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house, My household stuff, my field, my barn, My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything. And here she stands, touch her whoever dare. I’ll bring mine action on the proudest he That stops my way in Padua. —Grumio, Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves. Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.— Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate. I’ll buckler thee against a million.
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
[as LUCENTIO] Of all mad matches never was the like.
[as CAMBIO] Mistress, what’s your opinion of your sister?
That, being mad herself, she’s madly mated.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants For to supply the places at the table, You know there wants no junkets at the feast. [To TRANIO] Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom’s place, And let Bianca take her sister’s room.
[as LUCENTIO] Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let’s go.
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so 'rayed? Was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very lips mightfreeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself. For, considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.—Holla, ho! Curtis!
Who is that calls so coldly?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide frommy shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
O, ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. Cast on nowater.
Is she so hot a shrew as she’s reported?
She was, good Curtis, before this frost. But thou knowest winter tames man, woman and beast, for it hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, fellow Curtis.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I, at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy coldcomfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine, and therefore fire! Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
There’s fire ready. And therefore, good Grumio, the news.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, “Jack, boy! Ho, boy!” and as much news as wilt thou.
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold. Where’s the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on? Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?
All ready. And therefore, I pray thee, news.
First, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How?
Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs atale.
Let’s ha' ’t, good Grumio.
Lend thine ear.
Here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There!
This ’tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
And therefore ’tis called a sensible tale. And this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning.Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress—
Both of one horse?
What’s that to thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, a horse.
Tell thou the tale! But hadst thou not crossed me, thoushouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse. Thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place,how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me because her horse stumbled, howshe waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthymemory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou returnunexperienced to thy grave.
By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest. Let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit. Let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my master’s horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
They are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Call them forth.
[calling offstage] Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.
Why, she hath a face of her own.
Who knows not that?
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I call them forth to credit her.
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Welcome home, Grumio.
How now, Grumio?
What, Grumio!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fellow Grumio!
How now, old lad?
Welcome, you!—How now, you?—What, you!—Fellow, you!—And thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
All things is ready. How near is our master?
E'en at hand, alighted by this. And therefore be not— Cock’s passion, silence! I hear my master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where be these knaves? What, no man at door To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse! Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
Here, here, sir! Here, sir!
“Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!” You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms! What, no attendance? No regard? No duty? Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
You peasant swain! You whoreson malt-horse drudge!Did I not bid thee meet me in the parkAnd bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nathaniel’s coat, sir, was not fully made, And Gabriel’s pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel. There was no link to color Peter’s hat, And Walter’s dagger was not come from sheathing. There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory. The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly. Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Singing Where is the life that late I led— Where are those —Sit down, Kate, and welcome.—Soud, soud, soud, soud!
Why, when, I say?—Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.— Off with my boots, you rogues! You villains, when?
Sings It was the friar of orders gray, As he forth walkèd on his way :— A servant tries to take off PETRUCHIO ’s boots. Out, you rogue! You pluck my foot awry. Take that, and mend the plucking off the other. Strikes the servant Be merry, Kate.—Some water, here, what, ho! Where’s my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.—Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?—
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.—You whoreson villain! Will you let it fall? Strikes him
Patience, I pray you! 'Twas a fault unwilling.
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!— Come, Kate, sit down. I know you have a stomach. Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?— What’s this? Mutton?
Ay.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who brought it?
I.
'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat. What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook? How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser And serve it thus to me that love it not? There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all! Throws the meat, & c. about the stage You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves! What, do you grumble? I’ll be with you straight.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet. The meat was well, if you were so contented.
I tell thee, Kate, ’twas burnt and dried away. And I expressly am forbid to touch it, For it engenders choler, planteth anger; And better ’twere that both of us did fast, Since of ourselves, ourselves are choleric, Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh. Be patient, tomorrow ’t shall be mended, And, for this night, we’ll fast for company. Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Peter, didst ever see the like?
He kills her in her own humor.
Where is he?
In her chamber, Making a sermon of continency to her, And rails and swears and rates, that she, poor soul, Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak, And sits as one new-risen from a dream. Away, away, for he is coming hither!
Thus have I politicly begun my reign, And ’tis my hope to end successfully. My falcon now is sharp and passing empty, And, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged, For then she never looks upon her lure. Another way I have to man my haggard, To make her come and know her keeper’s call. That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites That bate and beat and will not be obedient. She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat. Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not. As with the meat, some undeservèd fault I’ll find about the making of the bed, And here I’ll fling the pillow, there the bolster, This way the coverlet, another way the sheets. Ay, and amid this hurly I intend That all is done in reverend care of her. And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night, And if she chance to nod I’ll rail and brawl, And with the clamor keep her still awake. This is a way to kill a wife with kindness, And thus I’ll curb her mad and headstrong humor. He that knows better how to tame a shrew, Now let him speak; ’tis charity to show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Is ’t possible, friend Litio, that mistress BiancaDoth fancy any other but Lucentio?I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
[as LITIO] Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching. They stand aside
[as CAMBIO] Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
[as CAMBIO] I read that I profess, The Art to Love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And may you prove, sir, master of your art.
[as CAMBIO] While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
[as LITIO] Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,You that durst swear that your mistress BiancaLoved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
[as LUCENTIO] O despiteful love! Unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful!
Mistake no more. I am not Litio, Nor a musician as I seem to be, But one that scorn to live in this disguise For such a one as leaves a gentleman And makes a god of such a cullion. Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Signior Hortensio, I have often heard Of your entire affection to Bianca, And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness, I will with you, if you be so contented, Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
See how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio, Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow Never to woo her more, but do forswear her As one unworthy all the former favors That I have fondly flattered her withal.
And here I take the like unfeignèd oathNever to marry with her, though she would entreat.Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn! For me, that I may surely keep mine oath, I will be married to a wealthy widow, Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard. And so farewell, Signior Lucentio. Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks, Shall win my love, and so I take my leave, In resolution as I swore before.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace As 'longeth to a lover’s blessèd case! Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love, And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?
Mistress, we have.
Then we are rid of Litio.
I' faith, he’ll have a lusty widow nowThat shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
God give him joy!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and he’ll tame her.
He says so, Tranio?
Faith, he is gone unto the taming school.
The taming school? What, is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty longTo tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O master, master, I have watched so long That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied An ancient angel coming down the hill Will serve the turn.
What is he, Biondello?
Master, a marcantant, or a pedant, I know not what, but formal in apparel,In gait and countenance surely like a father.
And what of him, Tranio?
If he be credulous and trust my tale, I’ll make him glad to seem Vincentio And give assurance to Baptista Minola As if he were the right Vincentio. Take in your love, and then let me alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]God save you, sir.
[as LUCENTIO] And you, sir. You are welcome.Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two,But then up farther, and as far as Rome,And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
[as LUCENTIO] What countryman, I pray?
Of Mantua.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid! And come to Padua, careless of your life?
My life, sir! how, I pray? For that goes hard.
'Tis death for anyone in Mantua To come to Padua. Know you not the cause? Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke, For private quarrel ’twixt your duke and him, Hath published and proclaimed it openly. 'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come, You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so, For I have bills for money by exchangeFrom Florence, and must here deliver them.
[as LUCENTIO] Well, sir, to do you courtesy,This will I do, and this I will advise you.First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,Pisa renownèd for grave citizens.
[as LUCENTIO] Among them know you one Vincentio?
I know him not, but I have heard of him:A merchant of incomparable wealth.
[as LUCENTIO] He is my father, sir, and sooth to say,In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
[aside] As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] To save your life in this extremity, This favor will I do you for his sake— And think it not the worst of all your fortunes That you are like to Sir Vincentio— His name and credit shall you undertake, And in my house you shall be friendly lodged. Look that you take upon you as you should. You understand me, sir. So shall you stay Till you have done your business in the city. If this be court’sy, sir, accept of it.
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty.
(as LUCENTIO ) Then go with me to make the matter good. This, by the way, I let you understand: My father is here looked for every day To pass assurance of a dower in marriage 'Twixt me and one Baptista’s daughter here. In all these circumstances I’ll instruct you. Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
No, no, forsooth, I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears. What, did he marry me to famish me? Beggars that come unto my father’s door Upon entreaty have a present alms. If not, elsewhere they meet with charity. But I, who never knew how to entreat, Nor never needed that I should entreat, Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep, With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed. And that which spites me more than all these wants, He does it under name of perfect love, As who should say, if I should sleep or eat, 'Twere deadly sickness or else present death. I prithee, go and get me some repast, I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What say you to a neat’s foot?
'Tis passing good. I prithee let me have it.
I fear it is too choleric a meat. How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.
I cannot tell. I fear ’tis choleric. What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A dish that I do love to feed upon.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Nay then, I will not. You shall have the mustardOr else you get no beef of Grumio.
Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why then, the mustard without the beef.
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave, (Beats him) That feed’st me with the very name of meat. Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you That triumph thus upon my misery. Go, get thee gone, I say.
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer?
Faith, as cold as can be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pluck up thy spirits. Look cheerfully upon me. Here love, thou seest how diligent I am, To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee. I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks. What, not a word? Nay, then thou lov’st it not And all my pains is sorted to no proof. Here, take away this dish.
I pray you, let it stand.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks,And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
I thank you, sir.
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame.Come, mistress Kate, I’ll bear you company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to HORTENSIO ] Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.— Much good do it unto thy gentle heart. Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love, Will we return unto thy father’s house And revel it as bravely as the best, With silken coats and caps and golden rings, With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things, With scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry, With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry. What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments.Lay forth the gown.
What news with you, sir?
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.
Why, this was molded on a porringer! A velvet dish! Fie, fie, ’tis lewd and filthy! Why, ’tis a cockle or a walnut shell, A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby’s cap. Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll have no bigger. This doth fit the time, And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,And not till then.
[aside] That will not be in haste.
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak, And speak I will. I am no child, no babe. Your betters have endured me say my mind, And if you cannot, best you stop your ears. My tongue will tell the anger of my heart Or else my heart, concealing it, will break, And, rather than it shall, I will be free Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Why, thou say’st true. It is a paltry cap,A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.I love thee well in that thou lik’st it not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Love me or love me not, I like the cap, And it I will have, or I will have none.
Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see ’t. O mercy, God! What masking stuff is here? What’s this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon. What, up and down, carved like an apple tart? Here’s snip and nip and cut and slish and slash, Like to a censer in a barber’s shop. Why, what i' devil’s name, tailor, call’st thou this?
[aside] I see she’s like to have neither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderly and well, According to the fashion and the time.
Marry, and did. But if you be remembered, I did not bid you mar it to the time. Go, hop me over every kennel home, For you shall hop without my custom, sir. I’ll none of it. Hence, make your best of it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I never saw a better-fashioned gown,More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her.
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble, Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter cricket thou! Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread? Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant, Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv’st! I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made Just as my master had direction.Grumio gave order how it should be done.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I gave him no order. I gave him the stuff.
But how did you desire it should be made?
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
But did you not request to have it cut?
Thou hast faced many things.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have.
Face not me. Thou hast braved many men; brave not me. Iwill neither be faced nor braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces. Ergo, thou liest.
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
Read it.
The note lies in ’s throat, if he say I said so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reads] “ Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown—”
Master, if ever I said “loose-bodied gown,” sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. I said “a gown.”
Proceed.
[reads] “With a small-compassed cape—”
I confess the cape.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][reads] “With a trunk sleeve—”
I confess two sleeves.
[reads] “The sleeves curiously cut.”
Ay, there’s the villany.
Error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill! I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that I’ll prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is true that I say: an I had thee in place where,thou shouldst know it.
I am for thee straight. Take thou the bill, give me thymete- yard, and spare not me.
God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
You are i' the right, sir, ’tis for my mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, take it up unto thy master’s use.
Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for thy master’s use!
Why, sir, what’s your conceit in that?
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. Take up my mistress' gown to his master’s use! O, fie, fie, fie!
[aside] Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid. [To TAILOR] Go, take it hence. Begone, and say no more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to TAILOR ] Tailor, I’ll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow.Take no unkindness of his hasty words.Away, I say. Commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate. We will unto your father’s Even in these honest mean habiliments. Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor, For ’tis the mind that makes the body rich, And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, So honor peereth in the meanest habit. What, is the jay more precious than the lark Because his feathers are more beautiful? Or is the adder better than the eel Because his painted skin contents the eye? Oh, no, good Kate. Neither art thou the worse For this poor furniture and mean array. If thou account’st it shame, lay it on me, And therefore frolic! We will hence forthwith To feast and sport us at thy father’s house. [To GRUMIO ] Go, call my men, and let us straight to him, And bring our horses unto Long Lane end. There will we mount, and thither walk on foot. Let’s see, I think ’tis now some seven o'clock, And well we may come there by dinnertime.
I dare assure you, sir, ’tis almost two,And ’twill be supper time ere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse. Look what I speak, or do, or think to do, You are still crossing it. Sirs, let ’t alone. I will not go today, and ere I do It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
[aside] Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Sir, this is the house. Please it you that I call?
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived, Signior Baptista may remember me, Near twenty years ago, in Genoa, Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
[as LUCENTIO] 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes your boy.'Twere good he were schooled.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] Fear you not him.—Sirrah Biondello,Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.Imagine ’twere the right Vincentio.
Tut, fear not me.
[as LUCENTIO] But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
I told him that your father was at Venice,And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
[as LUCENTIO] Thou'rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink. Gives money
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.— [To the MERCHANT ] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of. I pray you stand good father to me now. Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
[as VINCENTIO] Soft son.— Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio Made me acquainted with a weighty cause Of love between your daughter and himself. And, for the good report I hear of you And for the love he beareth to your daughter And she to him, to stay him not too long, I am content, in a good father’s care, To have him matched. And if you please to like No worse than I, upon some agreement Me shall you find ready and willing With one consent to have her so bestowed, For curious I cannot be with you, Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say. Your plainness and your shortness please me well. Right true it is your son Lucentio here Doth love my daughter and she loveth him, Or both dissemble deeply their affections. And therefore, if you say no more than this, That like a father you will deal with him And pass my daughter a sufficient dower, The match is made, and all is done. Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
[as LUCENTIO] I thank you, sir. Where then do you know bestWe be affied and such assurance ta'enAs shall with either part’s agreement stand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants. Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still, And happily we might be interrupted.
[as LUCENTIO] Then at my lodging, an it like you. There doth my father lie, and there this night We’ll pass the business privately and well. Send for your daughter by your servant here. My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently. The worst is this, that at so slender warning You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
It likes me well. —Cambio, hie you home, And bid Bianca make her ready straight. And, if you will, tell what hath happenèd: Lucentio’s father is arrived in Padua, And how she’s like to be Lucentio’s wife.
I pray the gods she may, with all my heart!
[as LUCENTIO] Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.— Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way? Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer. Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I follow you.
Cambio.
What sayest thou, Biondello?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
Biondello, what of that?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Faith, nothing; but 'has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
I pray thee, moralize them.
Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceivingfather of a deceitful son.
And what of him?
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And then?
The old priest at Saint Luke’s Church is at your command at all hours.
And what of all this?
I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance. Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. To th' church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses. If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day.
Hear’st thou, Biondello?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit,and so may you, sir. And so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke’s to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.
I may, and will, if she be so contented. She will be pleased. Then wherefore should I doubt? Hap what hap may, I’ll roundly go about her. It shall go hard if “Cambio” go without her.
Come on, i' God’s name, once more toward our father’s.Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Now, by my mother’s son, and that’s myself, It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, Or e'er I journey to your father’s house. [To servants] Go on, and fetch our horses back again.— Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
[To KATHERINE] Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far, And be it moon, or sun, or what you please. An if you please to call it a rush candle, Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
I say it is the moon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it is the moon.
Nay, then you lie. It is the blessèd sun.
Then God be blessed, it is the blessèd sun. But sun it is not, when you say it is not, And the moon changes even as your mind. What you will have it named, even that it is, And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
Well, forward, forward! Thus the bowl should run,And not unluckily against the bias.But, soft! Company is coming here.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To VINCENTIO] Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?— Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too, Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman? Such war of white and red within her cheeks! What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty As those two eyes become that heavenly face?— Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.— Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty’s sake.
[aside] He will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet, Whither away, or where is thy abode? Happy the parents of so fair a child. Happier the man whom favorable stars Allot thee for his lovely bedfellow!
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad.This is a man—old, wrinkled, faded, withered— And not a maiden, as thou say’st he is.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes That have been so bedazzled with the sun That everything I look on seemeth green. Now I perceive thou art a reverend father. Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do, good old grandsire, and withal make knownWhich way thou travellest. If along with us,We shall be joyful of thy company.
Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress, That with your strange encounter much amazed me, My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa, And bound I am to Padua, there to visit A son of mine which long I have not seen.
What is his name?
Lucentio, gentle sir.
Happily met, the happier for thy son. And now by law as well as reverend age, I may entitle thee my loving father. The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not Nor be grieved. She is of good esteem, Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth. Beside, so qualified as may beseem The spouse of any noble gentleman. Let me embrace with old Vincentio, And wander we to see thy honest son, Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,Like pleasant travelers, to break a jestUpon the company you overtake?
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
Come, go along and see the truth hereof,For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.Have to my widow, and if she be froward, Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to need thee at home.Therefore leave us.
Nay, faith, I’ll see the church a' your back, and then come back to my master’s as soon as I can.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Sir, here’s the door. This is Lucentio’s house.My father’s bears more toward the marketplace.Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
You shall not choose but drink before you go.I think I shall command your welcome here,And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]They’re busy within. You were best knock louder.
[as VINCENTIO] What’s he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
[as VINCENTIO] He’s within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as VINCENTIO] Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. Heshall need none so long as I live.
[To VINCENTIO] Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua. —Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that hisfather is come from Pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.
[as VINCENTIO] Thou liest. His father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.
Art thou his father?
[as VINCENTIO] Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To VINCENTIO] Why, how now, gentleman! Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man’s name.
[as VINCENTIO] Lay hands on the villain. I believe he means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.
[aside] I have seen them in the church together. God send'em good shipping! But who is here? Mine old masterVincentio! Now we are undone and brought to nothing.
[To BIONDELLO] Come hither, crack-hemp.
Hope I may choose, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come hither, you rogue! What, have you forgot me?
Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy master’s father, Vincentio?
What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir. See where he looks out of the window.
Is ’t so, indeed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Help, help, help! Here’s a madman will murder me.
[as VINCENTIO] Help, son! Help, Signior Baptista!
Prithee, Kate, let’s stand aside and see the end of this controversy.
[as LUCENTIO] Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
What am I, sir! Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet, a velvet hose, ascarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! Oh, I am undone, I am undone! While I play the good husband at home, my sonand my servant spend all at the university.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][as LUCENTIO] How now, what’s the matter?
What, is the man lunatic?
[as LUCENTIO] Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father I am able to maintain it.
Thy father! O villain! He is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you think is his name?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought himup ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.
[as VINCENTIO] Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.
Lucentio! Oh, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you in the Duke’s name. O my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
[as LUCENTIO] Call forth an officer.
Carry this mad knave to the jail.—Father Baptista,I charge you see that he be forthcoming.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Carry me to the jail?
Stay, officer. He shall not go to prison.
Talk not, Signior Gremio. I say he shall go to prison.
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
[as VINCENTIO] Swear, if thou darest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, I dare not swear it.
[as LUCENTIO] Then thou wert best say that I am notLucentio.
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard! To the jail with him!
Thus strangers may be haled and abused.—O monstrous villain!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O! We are spoiled and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.
Pardon, sweet father.
Lives my sweet son?
Pardon, dear father.
How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here’s Lucentio, right son to the right Vincentio,That have by marriage made thy daughter mineWhile counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
Here’s packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
Where is that damnèd villain, Tranio,That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Love wrought these miracles. Bianca’s love Made me exchange my state with Tranio, While he did bear my countenance in the town, And happily I have arrivèd at the last Unto the wishèd haven of my bliss. What Tranio did, myself enforced him to. Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
I’ll slit the villain’s nose that would have sent me tothe jail.
But do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill?
Fear not, Baptista, we will content you. Go to. But I will in to be revenged for this villany.
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not frown.
My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the rest,Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.
Husband, let’s follow to see the end of this ado.
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
What, in the midst of the street?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, art thou ashamed of me?
No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
Why, then let’s home again. [To GRUMIO] Come, sirrah, let’s away.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss. [kisses him] Now pray thee, love, stay.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate.Better once than never, for never too late.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At last, though long, our jarring notes agree, And time it is when raging war is done To smile at ’scapes and perils overblown. My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine. Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow, Feast with the best, and welcome to my house. My banquet is to close our stomachs up, After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down, For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Roundly replied.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mistress, how mean you that?
Thus I conceive by him.
Conceives by me? How likes Hortensio that?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]“He that is giddy thinks the world turns round”—I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
Your husband being troubled with a shrew Measures my husband’s sorrow by his woe.And now you know my meaning.
A very mean meaning.
Right, I mean you.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To her, Kate!
To her, widow!
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
That’s my office.
Spoke like an officer! Ha' to thee, lad!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted bodyWould say your head and butt were head and horn.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
Ay, but not frighted me. Therefore I’ll sleep again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, that you shall not. Since you have begun,Have at you for a bitter jest or two!
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,And then pursue me as you draw your bow.—You are welcome all.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.—Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
Oh, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound,Which runs himself and catches for his master.
A good swift simile, but something currish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself.'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
Oh, Oh, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
He has a little galled me, I confess.And, as the jest did glance away from me,'Tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio, I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Well, I say no. And therefore, for assurance, Let’s each one send unto his wife; And he whose wife is most obedient To come at first when he doth send for her, Shall win the wager which we will propose.
Content. What’s the wager?
Twenty crowns.
Twenty crowns?I’ll venture so much of my hawk or hound, But twenty times so much upon my wife.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A hundred then.
Content.
A match! 'Tis done.
Who shall begin?
That will I.Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I go.
Son, I’ll be your half Bianca comes.
I’ll have no halves. I’ll bear it all myself.
How now, what news?
Sir, my mistress sends you wordThat she is busy, and she cannot come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How! “She’s busy, and she cannot come!”Is that an answer?
Ay, and a kind one too.Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
I hope better.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wifeTo come to me forthwith.
O, ho, entreat her!Nay, then she must needs come.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am afraid, sir,Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Now, where’s my wife?
She says you have some goodly jest in hand.She will not come. She bids you come to her.
Worse and worse. She will not come! O vile, intolerable, not to be endured!— Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress, Say I command her to come to me.
I know her answer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What?
She will not.
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina!
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where is your sister, and Hortensio’s wife?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,And awful rule, and right supremacy,And, to be short, what not that’s sweet and happy?
Now, fair befall thee, good Petruchio! The wager thou hast won, and I will add Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns, Another dowry to another daughter,For she is changed as she had never been.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,And show more sign of her obedience,Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes and brings your froward wives As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.— Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not. Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Fie! What a foolish duty call you this?
I would your duty were as foolish too.The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,Hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Come, come, you’re mocking. We will have no telling.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
She shall not.
I say she shall.—And first begin with her.
Fie, fie! Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow And dart not scornful glances from those eyes To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor. It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads, Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds, And in no sense is meet or amiable. A woman moved is like a fountain troubled, Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty, And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it. Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper, Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee, And for thy maintenance commits his body To painful labor both by sea and land, To watch the night in storms, the day in cold, Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe, And craves no other tribute at thy hands But love, fair looks and true obedience— Too little payment for so great a debt. Such duty as the subject owes the prince, Even such a woman oweth to her husband. And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour, And not obedient to his honest will, What is she but a foul contending rebel And graceless traitor to her loving lord? I am ashamed that women are so simple To offer war where they should kneel for peace; Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway When they are bound to serve, love, and obey. Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth, Unapt to toil and trouble in the world, But that our soft conditions and our hearts Should well agree with our external parts? Come, come, you froward and unable worms! My mind hath been as big as one of yours, My heart as great, my reason haply more, To bandy word for word and frown for frown. But now I see our lances are but straws, Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare, That seeming to be most which we indeed least are. Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot, And place your hands below your husband’s foot: In token of which duty, if he please, My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
Why, there’s a wench! Come on and kiss me, Kate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha ’t.
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
[To LUCENTIO] Come, Kate, we’ll to bed. We three are married, but you two are sped. 'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white, And, being a winner, God give you good night!
Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.
Boatswain!
Here, master. What cheer?
Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to ’t yarely, or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir.
Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! Yare! Yare!Take in the topsail. Tend to th' master’s whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good Boatswain, have care. Where’s the Master?Play the men.
I pray now, keep below.
Where is the Master, Boatswain?
Do you not hear him? You mar our labor. Keep your cabins.You do assist the storm.
Nay, good, be patient.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin, silence! Trouble us not.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
None that I more love than myself. You are a councilor.If you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. Use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.— Cheerly, good hearts!— Out of our way, I say.
I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hathno drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging. Make therope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
Down with the topmast! Yare, lower, lower! Bring her totry wi' th' main course.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A plague upon this howling! They are louder than the weather or our office.
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and drown?Have you a mind to sink?
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
Work you, then.
Hang, cur! Hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’ll warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! Set her two courses off to sea again.Lay her off!
All lost! To prayers, to prayers, all lost!
What, must our mouths be cold?
The king and prince at prayers. Let’s assist them, for our case is as theirs.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I’m out of patience.
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. This wide-chopped rascal—would thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
He’ll be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.
[within] Mercy on us! We split, we split! Farewell, my wife and children! Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!
Let’s all sink wi' th' king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let’s take leave of him.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acreof barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.
If by your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them. The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin’s cheek, Dashes the fire out. Oh, I have suffered With those that I saw suffer. A brave vessel Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her Dashed all to pieces. Oh, the cry did knock Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perished. Had I been any god of power, I would Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere It should the good ship so have swallowed and The fraughting souls within her.
Be collected.No more amazement. Tell your piteous heartThere’s no harm done.
Oh, woe the day!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No harm. I have done nothing but in care of thee, Of thee, my dear one—thee my daughter, who Art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing Of whence I am, nor that I am more better Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell And thy no greater father.
More to knowDid never meddle with my thoughts.
'Tis timeI should inform thee farther. Lend thy handAnd pluck my magic garment from me.
Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes. Have comfort. The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched The very virtue of compassion in thee, I have with such provision in mine art So safely ordered that there is no soul— No, not so much perdition as an hair Betid to any creature in the vessel— Which thou heard’st cry, which thou sawst sink. Sit down. For thou must now know farther.
You have often Begun to tell me what I am, but stopped And left me to a bootless inquisition, Concluding, “Stay. Not yet.”
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The hour’s now come. The very minute bids thee ope thine ear. Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember A time before we came unto this cell? I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not Out three years old.
Certainly, sir, I can.
By what? By any other house or person? Of anything the image tell me that Hath kept with thy remembrance.
'Tis far off, And rather like a dream than an assurance That my remembrance warrants. Had I not Four or five women once that tended me?
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else In the dark backward and abysm of time? If thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here, How thou camest here thou mayst.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But that I do not.
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,Thy father was the Duke of Milan andA prince of power.
Sir, are not you my father?
Thy mother was a piece of virtue and She said thou wast my daughter. And thy father Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir And princess no worse issued.
Oh, the heavens! What foul play had we that we came from thence? Or blessèd was ’t we did?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Both, both, my girl. By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence, But blessedly holp hither.
Oh, my heart bleedsTo think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.
My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio— I pray thee, mark me (that a brother should Be so perfidious!)— he whom next thyself Of all the world I loved and to him put The manage of my state, as at that time Through all the signories it was the first, And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed In dignity, and for the liberal arts Without a parallel. Those being all my study, The government I cast upon my brother And to my state grew stranger, being transported And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle— Dost thou attend me?
Sir, most heedfully.
Being once perfected how to grant suits, How to deny them, who t' advance and who To trash for overtopping, new created The creatures that were mine, I say —or changed 'em, Or else new formed 'em—having both the key Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state To what tune pleased his ear, that now he was The ivy which had hid my princely trunk, And sucked my verdure out on ’t. Thou attend’st not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, good sir, I do.
I pray thee, mark me. I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated To closeness and the bettering of my mind With that which, but by being so retired, O'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother Awaked an evil nature. And my trust, Like a good parent, did beget of him A falsehood in its contrary as great As my trust was, which had indeed no limit, A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded, Not only with what my revenue yielded But what my power might else exact, like one Who having into truth, by telling of it, Made such a sinner of his memory To credit his own lie— he did believe He was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution And executing th' outward face of royalty, With all prerogative: Hence his ambition growing— Dost thou hear?
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
To have no screen between this part he played And him he played it for, he needs will be Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library Was dukedom large enough. Of temporal royalties He thinks me now incapable, confederates— So dry he was for sway—wi' th' King of Naples To give him annual tribute, do him homage, Subject his coronet to his crown and bend The dukedom yet unbowed— alas, poor Milan!— To most ignoble stooping.
Oh, the heavens!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mark his condition and the event. Then tell meIf this might be a brother.
I should sinTo think but nobly of my grandmother.Good wombs have borne bad sons.
Now the condition. The King of Naples, being an enemy To me inveterate, hearkens my brother’s suit, Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises Of homage and I know not how much tribute, Should presently extirpate me and mine Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan With all the honors on my brother. Whereon, A treacherous army levied, one midnight Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open The gates of Milan, and, i' th' dead of darkness, The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence Me and thy crying self.
Alack, for pity! I, not remembering how I cried out then, Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint That wrings mine eyes to ’t.
Hear a little further And then I’ll bring thee to the present business Which now ’s upon ’s, without the which this story Were most impertinent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore did they notThat hour destroy us?
Well demanded, wench. My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not, So dear the love my people bore me, nor set A mark so bloody on the business, but With colors fairer painted their foul ends. In few, they hurried us aboard a bark, Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged, Nor tackle, sail, nor mast. The very rats Instinctively had quit it. There they hoist us To cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh To th' winds whose pity, sighing back again, Did us but loving wrong.
Alack, what troubleWas I then to you!
Oh, a cherubim Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile Infusèd with a fortitude from heaven, When I have decked the sea with drops full salt, Under my burthen groaned; which raised in me An undergoing stomach to bear up Against what should ensue.
How came we ashore?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By providence divine. Some food we had and some fresh water that A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo, Out of his charity, who being then appointed Master of this design, did give us, with Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries, Which since have steaded much. So, of his gentleness, Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me From mine own library with volumes that I prize above my dukedom.
Would I mightBut ever see that man!
Now I arise. [stands and puts on his mantle] Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow. Here in this island we arrived, and here Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit Than other princesses can that have more time For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.
Heavens thank you for ’t! And now, I pray you, sir— For still ’tis beating in my mind—your reason For raising this sea storm?
Know thus far forth: By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune (Now my dear lady) hath mine enemies Brought to this shore. And by my prescience I find my zenith doth depend upon A most auspicious star, whose influence If now I court not but omit, my fortunes Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions. Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness, And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.Approach, my Ariel, come.
All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come To answer thy best pleasure, be ’t to fly, To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride On the curled clouds. To thy strong bidding, task Ariel and all his quality.
Hast thou, spirit,Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee?
To every article. I boarded the king’s ship. Now on the beak, Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin, I flamed amazement. Sometime I’d divide, And burn in many places. On the topmast, The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly, Then meet and join. Jove’s lightning, the precursors O' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary And sight-outrunning were not. The fire and cracks Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble, Yea, his dread trident shake.
My brave spirit!Who was so firm, so constant, that this coilWould not infect his reason?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not a soul But felt a fever of the mad and played Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel, Then all afire with me. The king’s son, Ferdinand, With hair up-staring—then, like reeds, not hair— Was the first man that leaped, cried, “Hell is empty And all the devils are here.”
Why, that’s my spirit!But was not this nigh shore?
Close by, my master.
But are they, Ariel, safe?
Not a hair perished. On their sustaining garments not a blemish, But fresher than before. And, as thou badest me, In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle. The king’s son have I landed by himself, Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting, His arms in this sad knot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Of the king’s ship,The mariners, say how thou hast disposed,And all the rest o' th' fleet.
Safely in harbor Is the king’s ship. In the deep nook where once Thou called’st me up at midnight to fetch dew From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there she’s hid. The mariners all under hatches stowed, Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor, I have left asleep. And for the rest o' th' fleet, Which I dispersed, they all have met again And are upon the Mediterranean float, Bound sadly home for Naples, Supposing that they saw the king’s ship wracked And his great person perish.
Ariel, thy chargeExactly is performed. But there’s more work.What is the time o' th' day?
Past the mid season.
At least two glasses. The time ’twixt six and nowMust by us both be spent most preciously.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains, Let me remember thee what thou hast promised, Which is not yet performed me.
How now? Moody?What is ’t thou canst demand?
My liberty.
Before the time be out? No more!
I prithee, Remember I have done thee worthy service, Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou didst promise To bate me a full year.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dost thou forgetFrom what a torment I did free thee?
No.
Thou dost, and think’st it much to tread the ooze Of the salt deep, To run upon the sharp wind of the north, To do me business in the veins o' th' earth When it is baked with frost.
I do not, sir.
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, sir.
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
Sir, in Argier.
Oh, was she so? I must Once in a month recount what thou hast been, Which thou forget’st. This damned witch Sycorax, For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible To enter human hearing, from Argier, Thou know’st, was banished. For one thing she did They would not take her life. Is not this true?
Ay, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave, As thou report’st thyself, wast then her servant. And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate To act her earthy and abhorred commands, Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee, By help of her more potent ministers And in her most unmitigable rage, Into a cloven pine, within which rift Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain A dozen years; within which space she died And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island— Save for the son that she did litter here, A freckled whelp hag-born—not honored with A human shape.
Yes, Caliban, her son.
Dull thing, I say so. He, that Caliban Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know’st What torment I did find thee in. Thy groans Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts Of ever angry bears. It was a torment To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax Could not again undo. It was mine art, When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape The pine and let thee out.
I thank thee, master.
If thou more murmur’st, I will rend an oak And peg thee in his knotty entrails till Thou hast howled away twelve winters.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pardon, master.I will be correspondent to commandAnd do my spiriting gently.
Do so, and after two daysI will discharge thee.
That’s my noble master!What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. Be subject To no sight but thine and mine, invisible To every eyeball else. Go take this shape And hither come in ’t. Go hence with diligence.
[to MIRANDA] Awake, dear heart, awake! Thou hast slept well.Awake!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][waking] The strangeness of your story putHeaviness in me.
Shake it off. Come on. We’ll visit Caliban, my slave who never Yields us kind answer.
'Tis a villain, sir,I do not love to look on.
But as ’tis, We cannot miss him. He does make our fire, Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices That profit us. What, ho! Slave! Caliban! Thou earth, thou! Speak.
[within] There’s wood enough within.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come forth, I say! There’s other business for thee.Come, thou tortoise! When?
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,Hark in thine ear. [whispers to ARIEL]
My lord it shall be done.
[to CALIBAN] Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himselfUpon thy wicked dam, come forth!
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed With raven’s feather from unwholesome fen Drop on you both! A southwest blow on ye And blister you all o'er!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps, Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins Shall, forth at vast of night that they may work, All exercise on thee. Thou shalt be pinched As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging Than bees that made 'em.
I must eat my dinner. This island’s mine, by Sycorax my mother, Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first, Thou strok’st me and made much of me, wouldst give me Water with berries in ’t, and teach me how To name the bigger light, and how the less, That burn by day and night. And then I loved thee And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle, The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile. Cursed be I that did so! All the charms Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you! For I am all the subjects that you have, Which first was mine own king. And here you sty me In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me The rest o' th' island.
Thou most lying slave, Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have used thee, Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee In mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate The honor of my child.
Oh ho, oh ho! Would ’t had been done!Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled elseThis isle with Calibans.
Abhorrèd slave, Which any print of goodness wilt not take, Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee, Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage, Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes With words that made them known. But thy vile race, Though thou didst learn, had that in ’t which good natures Could not abide to be with. Therefore wast thou Deservedly confined into this rock, Who hadst deserved more than a prison.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You taught me language, and my profit on ’t Is I know how to curse. The red plague rid you For learning me your language!
Hag-seed, hence! Fetch us in fuel. And be quick, thou 'rt best, To answer other business. Shrug’st thou, malice? If thou neglect’st or dost unwillingly What I command, I’ll rack thee with old cramps, Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
No, pray thee. [aside] I must obey. His art is of such power, It would control my dam’s god, Setebos, And make a vassal of him.
So, slave, hence!
[sings] Come unto these yellow sands, And then take hands. Curtsied when you have, and kissed The wild waves whist. Foot it featly here and there, And, sweet sprites, bear The burden. Hark, hark!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][dispersedly, within] Bow-wow.
The watchdogs bark.
(within) Bow-wow.
Hark, hark! I hearThe strain of strutting chanticleerCry “Cock-a-diddle-dow.”
Where should this music be? I' th' air or th' earth? It sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon Some god o' th' island. Sitting on a bank, Weeping again the king my father’s wrack, This music crept by me upon the waters, Allaying both their fury and my passion With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it, Or it hath drawn me rather. But ’tis gone. No, it begins again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] Full fathom five thy father lies. Of his bones are coral made. Those are pearls that were his eyes. Nothing of him that doth fade, But doth suffer a sea-change Into something rich and strange. Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell.
[within] Ding-dong.
Hark, now I hear them.
[within] Ding-dong, bell.
The ditty does remember my drowned father. This is no mortal business, nor no sound That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to MIRANDA] The fringèd curtains of thine eye advanceAnd say what thou seest yond.
What is ’t? A spirit? Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir, It carries a brave form. But ’tis a spirit.
No, wench! It eats and sleeps and hath such senses As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest Was in the wrack. And, but he’s something stained With grief that’s beauty’s canker, thou mightst call him A goodly person. He hath lost his fellows And strays about to find 'em.
I might call himA thing divine, for nothing naturalI ever saw so noble.
[aside] It goes on, I see,As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! I’ll free theeWithin two days for this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][seeing MIRANDA] Most sure, the goddess On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer May know if you remain upon this island, And that you will some good instruction give How I may bear me here. My prime request, Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder! If you be maid or no.
No wonder, sir,But certainly a maid.
My language! Heavens,I am the best of them that speak this speech,Were I but where ’tis spoken.
How? The best?What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me, And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples, Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld The king my father wracked.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alack, for mercy!
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of MilanAnd his brave son being twain.
[aside] The Duke of Milan And his more braver daughter could control thee If now ’twere fit to do ’t! At the first sight They have changed eyes. Delicate Ariel, I’ll set thee free for this. [to FERDINAND] A word, good sir. I fear you have done yourself some wrong. A word.
[ aside] Why speaks my father so ungently? This Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first That e'er I sighed for. Pity move my father To be inclined my way!
[to MIRANDA] Oh, if a virgin, And your affection not gone forth, I’ll make you The queen of Naples.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Soft, sir! One word more. [ aside] They are both in either’s powers, but this swift business I must uneasy make lest too light winning Make the prize light. [To FERDINAND] One word more. I charge thee That thou attend me. Thou dost here usurp The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself Upon this island as a spy to win it From me, the lord on ’t.
No, as I am a man!
There’s nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.If the ill spirit have so fair a house,Good things will strive to dwell with ’t.
[to FERDINAND] Follow me. [to MIRANDA] Speak not you for him. He’s a traitor. [to FERDINAND] Come, I’ll manacle thy neck and feet together. Seawater shalt thou drink. Thy food shall be The fresh-brook muscles, withered roots, and husks Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
No.I will resist such entertainment tillMine enemy has more power.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O dear father,Make not too rash a trial of him, forHe’s gentle and not fearful.
What, I say? My foot my tutor?— Put thy sword up, traitor, Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience Is so possessed with guilt. Come from thy ward, For I can here disarm thee with this stick And make thy weapon drop.
Beseech you, father.
Hence! Hang not on my garments.
Sir, have pity,I’ll be his surety.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Silence! One word more Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What, An advocate for an imposter? Hush, Thou think’st there is no more such shapes as he, Having seen but him and Caliban. Foolish wench, To th' most of men this is a Caliban And they to him are angels.
My affectionsAre then most humble. I have no ambitionTo see a goodlier man.
[to FERDINAND] Come on. Obey.Thy nerves are in their infancy againAnd have no vigor in them.
So they are. My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up. My father’s loss, the weakness which I feel, The wrack of all my friends, nor this man’s threats, To whom I am subdued, are but light to me, Might I but through my prison once a day Behold this maid. All corners else o' th' earth Let liberty make use of. Space enough Have I in such a prison.
[aside] It works! [to FERDINAND] Come on. [aside] Thou hast done well, fine Ariel! [to FERDINAND] Follow me. [to ARIEL] Hark what thou else shalt do me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to FERDINAND] Be of comfort. My father’s of a better nature, sir, Than he appears by speech. This is unwonted Which now came from him.
[to ARIEL] Thou shalt be freeAs mountain winds. But then exactly doAll points of my command.
To th' syllable.
[to FERDINAND] Come, follow. [to MIRANDA] Speak not for him.
[to ALONSO] Beseech you, sir, be merry. You have cause, So have we all, of joy, for our escape Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe Is common. Every day some sailor’s wife, The masters of some merchant, and the merchant Have just our theme of woe. But for the miracle— I mean our preservation—few in millions Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh Our sorrow with our comfort.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prithee, peace.
[to ANTONIO] He receives comfort like cold porridge.
[to SEBASTIAN] The visitor will not give him o'er so.
Look he’s winding up the watch of his wit. By and by itwill strike.
[to ALONSO] Sir—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ANTONIO] One. Tell.
When every grief is entertained that’s offered,Comes to th' entertainer—
A dollar.
Dolor comes to him, indeed. You have spoken truer than you purposed.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ALONSO] Therefore, my lord—
[to SEBASTIAN] Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
[to GONZALO] I prithee, spare.
Well, I have done. But yet—
[to ANTONIO] He will be talking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?
The old cock.
The cockerel.
Done. The wager?
A laughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A match!
Though this island seem to be desert—
[to SEBASTIAN] Ha, ha, ha!
So you’re paid.
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet—
Yet—
He could not miss ’t.
It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.
Or as ’twere perfumed by a fen.
Here is everything advantageous to life.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True. Save means to live.
Of that there’s none, or little.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! How green!
The ground indeed is tawny.
With an eye of green in ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He misses not much.
No, he doth but mistake the truth totally.
But the rarity of it is—which is indeed almost beyond credit—
As many vouched rarities are.
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in thesea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not sayhe lies?
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the king’s fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not since widow Dido’s time.
Widow! A pox o' that! How came that “widow” in? Widow Dido!
What if he had said “widower Aeneas” too? Good Lord, how you take it!
“Widow Dido” said you? You make me study of that. She was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Carthage?
I assure you, Carthage.
His word is more than the miraculous harp. He hath raised the wall and houses too.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.
Ay.
Why, in good time.
[to ALONSO] Sir, we were talking that our garments seemnow as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.
And the rarest that e'er came there.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
Oh, widow Dido? Ay, widow Dido.
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.
That “sort” was well fished for.
When I wore it at your daughter’s marriage?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You cram these words into mine ears against The stomach of my sense. Would I had never Married my daughter there! For, coming thence, My son is lost and, in my rate, she too, Who is so far from Italy removed I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish Hath made his meal on thee?
Sir, he may live. I saw him beat the surges under him, And ride upon their backs. He trod the water, Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted The surge most swoll'n that met him. His bold head 'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke To th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed, As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt He came alive to land.
No, no, he’s gone.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss, That would not bless our Europe with your daughter, But rather loose her to an African, Where she at least is banished from your eye, Who hath cause to wet the grief on ’t.
Prithee, peace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise By all of us, and the fair soul herself Weighed between loathness and obedience, at Which end o' th' beam should bow. We have lost your son, I fear, forever. Milan and Naples have More widows in them of this business' making Than we bring men to comfort them. The fault’s your own.
So is the dearest o' th' loss.
My lord Sebastian, The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness And time to speak it in. You rub the sore When you should bring the plaster.
Very well.
And most chirurgeonly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to ALONSO] It is foul weather in us all, good sir,When you are cloudy.
Foul weather?
Very foul.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord—
He’d sow ’t with nettle seed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or docks, or mallows.
And were the king on ’t, what would I do?
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.
I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries Execute all things. For no kind of traffic Would I admit. No name of magistrate. Letters should not be known. Riches, poverty, And use of service—none. Contract, succession, Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard—none. No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil. No occupation. All men idle, all. And women too, but innocent and pure. No sovereignty—
Yet he would be king on ’t.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.
All things in common nature should produce Without sweat or endeavor. Treason, felony, Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine, Would I not have. But nature should bring forth Of its own kind all foison, all abundance, To feed my innocent people.
No marrying ’mong his subjects?
None, man. All idle. Whores and knaves.
I would with such perfection govern, sir,T' excel the Golden Age.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Save his majesty!
Long live Gonzalo!
[to ALONSO] And—do you mark me, sir?
Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.
I do well believe your highness, and did it to ministeroccasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Twas you we laughed at.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. Soyou may continue and laugh at nothing still.
What a blow was there given!
An it had not fallen flat-long.
You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We would so, and then go a-batfowling.
[to GONZALO] Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
No, I warrant you. I will not adventure my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy?
Go sleep, and hear us.
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyesWould with themselves shut up my thoughts. I findThey are inclined to do so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Please you, sir, Do not omit the heavy offer of it. It seldom visits sorrow. When it doth, It is a comforter.
We two, my lord,Will guard your person while you take your restAnd watch your safety.
Thank you. Wondrous heavy. [falls asleep]
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
It is the quality o' th' climate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]WhyDoth it not then our eyelids sink? I find notMyself disposed to sleep.
Nor I. My spirits are nimble. They fell together all, as by consent. They dropped, as by a thunderstroke. What might, Worthy Sebastian, O, what might—? No more.— And yet methinks I see it in thy face, What thou shouldst be. Th' occasion speaks thee, and My strong imagination sees a crown Dropping upon thy head.
What, art thou waking?
Do you not hear me speak?
I do, and surely It is a sleepy language, and thou speak’st Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say? This is a strange repose, to be asleep With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving, And yet so fast asleep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Noble Sebastian,Thou let’st thy fortune sleep—die, rather—wink’stWhiles thou art waking.
Thou dost snore distinctly.There’s meaning in thy snores.
I am more serious than my custom. You Must be so too if heed me, which to do Trebles thee o'er.
Well, I am standing water.
I’ll teach you how to flow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do so. To ebbHereditary sloth instructs me.
Oh, If you but knew how you the purpose cherish Whiles thus you mock it! How, in stripping it, You more invest it! Ebbing men indeed Most often do so near the bottom run By their own fear or sloth.
Prithee, say on. The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim A matter from thee, and a birth indeed Which throes thee much to yield.
Thus, sir: Although this lord of weak remembrance—this, Who shall be of as little memory When he is earthed— hath here almost persuade (For he’s a spirit of persuasion only, Professes to persuade) the king his son’s alive, 'Tis as impossible that he’s undrowned And he that sleeps here swims.
I have no hopeThat he’s undrowned.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Oh, out of that “no hope” What great hope have you! No hope that way is Another way so high a hope that even Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me That Ferdinand is drowned?
He’s gone.
Then, tell me,Who’s the next heir of Naples?
Claribel.
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells Ten leagues beyond man’s life; she that from Naples Can have no note, unless the sun were post— The man i' th' moon’s too slow— till newborn chins Be rough and razorable; she that from whom We all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again, And by that destiny to perform an act Whereof what’s past is prologue, what to come In yours and my discharge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What stuff is this? How say you? 'Tis true, my brother’s daughter’s Queen of Tunis, So is she heir of Naples, ’twixt which regions There is some space.
A space whose every cubit Seems to cry out, “How shall that Claribel Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis, And let Sebastian wake.” Say this were death That now hath seized them. Why, they were no worse Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate As amply and unnecessarily As this Gonzalo. I myself could make A chough of as deep chat. Oh, that you bore The mind that I do, what a sleep were this For your advancement! Do you understand me?
Methinks I do.
And how does your contentTender your own good fortune?
I rememberYou did supplant your brother Prospero.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]True. And look how well my garments sit upon me, Much feater than before. My brother’s servants Were then my fellows. Now they are my men.
But, for your conscience?
Ay, sir. Where lies that? If ’twere a kibe, 'Twould put me to my slipper. But I feel not This deity in my bosom. Twenty consciences, That stand ’twixt me and Milan, candied be they And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother, No better than the earth he lies upon, If he were that which now he’s like, that’s dead; Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it, Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus, To the perpetual wink for aye might put This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest, They’ll take suggestion as a cat laps milk. They’ll tell the clock to any business that We say befits the hour.
Thy case, dear friend, Shall be my precedent. As thou got’st Milan, I’ll come by Naples. Draw thy sword. One stroke Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest. And I the king shall love thee.
Draw together.And when I rear my hand, do you the like,To fall it on Gonzalo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, but one word. [speaks quietly to ANTONIO]
[to GONZALO] My master through his art foresees the danger That you, his friend, are, and sends me forth— For else his project dies—to keep them living. [sings in GONZALO’s ear] While you here do snoring lie, Open-eyed conspiracy His time doth take. If of life you keep a care, Shake off slumber and beware. Awake! Awake!
Then let us both be sudden.
[waking and seeing them] Now, good angels preserve the king!
[waking] Why, how now? Ho, awake!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why are you drawn?Wherefore this ghastly looking?
What’s the matter?
Whiles we stood here securing your repose, Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing Like bulls, or rather lions. Did ’t not wake you? It struck mine ear most terribly.
I heard nothing.
Oh, ’twas a din to fright a monster’s ear, To make an earthquake! Sure, it was the roar Of a whole herd of lions.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Heard you this, Gonzalo?
Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming, And that a strange one too, which did awake me. I shaked you, sir, and cried. As mine eyes opened, I saw their weapons drawn. There was a noise, That’s verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard, Or that we quit this place. Let’s draw our weapons.
Lead off this ground, and let’s make further searchFor my poor son.
Heavens keep him from these beasts!For he is, sure, i' th' island.
Lead away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.
All the infections that the sun sucks up From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him By inchmeal a disease! His spirits hear me And yet I needs must curse. But they’ll nor pinch, Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire, Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark Out of my way, unless he bid 'em. But For every trifle are they set upon me, Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me, And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount Their pricks at my footfall. Sometime am I All wound with adders who with cloven tongues Do hiss me into madness.
Lo, now, lo! Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me For bringing wood in slowly. I’ll fall flat. Perchance he will not mind me. [lies down, covered by his gaberdine]
Here’s neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all. And another storm brewing, I hear it sing i' th'wind. Yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor. If it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to hide my head. Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls. [sees CALIBAN] What have we here? A man or a fish? Dead or alive? A fish. He smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. A strange fish! Were I in England now, as once I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a pieceof silver. There would this monster make a man. Any strange beast there makes a man. When they will not givea doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like arms! Warm, o' my troth. I do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.
Alas, the storm is come again! My best way is to creep underhis gaberdine. T here is no other shelter hereabouts. Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past. [crawlsunder gaberdine]
[SEQ_SPLITTER][sings] I shall no more to sea, to sea, Here shall I die ashore— This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man’s funeral. Well, here’s my comfort. [drinks, sings] The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I, The gunner and his mate Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery, But none of us cared for Kate. For she had a tongue with a tang, Would cry to a sailor, “Go hang!” She loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch, Yet a tailor might scratch her where'ershe did itch. Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang! This is a scurvy tune too. But here’s my comfort. [drinks]
Do not torment me. Oh!
What’s the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon ’s with savages and men of Ind, ha? I have not ’scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs. Or it hath been said, “As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground,” and it shall be said so again while Stephano breathes at' nostrils.
The spirit torments me. Oh!
This is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief if itbe but for that. If I can recover him and keep him tameand get to Naples with him, he’s a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat’s leather.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do not torment me, prithee. I’ll bring my wood home faster.
He’s in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest.He shall taste of my bottle. If he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him. He shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt. Thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling. Now Prosper works upon thee.
[trying to give CALIBAN drink] Come on your ways. Open your mouth. Here is that which will give language to you, cat. Open your mouth. This will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly. You cannot tell who’s your friend. Open your chaps again.
I should know that voice. It should be—But he is drowned, and these are devils. Oh, defend me!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Four legs and two voices—a most delicate monster.His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague. Come. [CALIBAN drinks] Amen! I will pour some in thy other mouth.
Stephano!
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is a devil, and no monster. I will leave him. I have no long spoon.
Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and speak tome. For I am Trinculo—be not afeard—thy good friend Trinculo.
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth. I’ll pull thee by the lesser legs. If any be Trinculo’s legs, these are they. [pulls TRINCULO out from under the gaberdine] Thouart very Trinculo indeed! How camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? Can he vent Trinculos?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the deadmooncalf’s gaberdine for fear of the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans ’scaped! [dances STEPHANO about]
Prithee, do not turn me about. My stomach is not constant.
[aside] These be fine things, an if they be not sprites. That’s a brave god and bears celestial liquor. I will kneel to him.
[to TRINCULO] How didst thou ’scape? How camest thou hither? Swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of the bark of atree with mine own hands since I was cast ashore.
[To STEPHANO] I’ll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to TRINCULO] Here. Swear then how thou escapedst.
Swum ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim like a duck, I’ll be sworn.
Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.
O Stephano, hast any more of this?
The whole butt, man. My cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid.—How now, mooncalf? How does thine ague?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hast thou not dropped from heaven?
Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee. I was the man i’ themoon when time was.
I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee. My mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
Come, swear to that, kiss the book. I will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.
By this good light, this is a very shallow monster. I afeard of him! A very weak monster. The man i' th' moon!A most poor credulous monster.— Well drawn, monster, in good sooth!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to STEPHANO] I’ll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island.And I will kiss thy foot. I prithee, be my god.
By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster.When ’s god’s asleep, he’ll rob his bottle.
[to STEPHANO] I’ll kiss thy foot. I’ll swear myself thysubject.
Come on then. Down, and swear.
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster.A most scurvy monster. I could find in my heart to beathim—
[SEQ_SPLITTER][To CALIBAN] Come, kiss.
But that the poor monster’s in drink. An abominable monster!
I’ll show thee the best springs. I’ll pluck thee berries. I’ll fish for thee and get thee wood enough. A plague upon the tyrant that I serve! I’ll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee, Thou wondrous man.
A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.
[to STEPHANO] I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow. And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts, Show thee a jay’s nest, and instruct thee how To snare the nimble marmoset. I’ll bring thee To clustering filberts, and sometimes I’ll get thee Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I prithee now, lead the way without any more talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here. Here, bear my bottle. Fellow Trinculo, we’ll fill him by and by again.
[sings drunkenly] Farewell, master! Farewell, farewell.
A howling monster, a drunken monster.
[sings] No more dams I’ll make for fish, Nor fetch in firing At requiring, Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish. 'Ban, 'Ban, Ca-Caliban Has a new master. Get a new man. Freedom, high-day! High-day, freedom! Freedom, high-day, freedom!
O brave monster! Lead the way.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There be some sports are painful, and their labor Delight in them sets off. Some kinds of baseness Are nobly undergone. And most poor matters Point to rich ends. This my mean task Would be as heavy to me as odious, but The mistress which I serve quickens what’s dead And makes my labors pleasures. Oh, she is Ten times more gentle than her father’s crabbed, And he’s composed of harshness. I must remove Some thousands of these logs and pile them up, Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress Weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness Had never like executor. I forget, But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors, Most busiest when I do it.
Alas now, pray you, Work not so hard. I would the lightning had Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile! Pray, set it down and rest you. When this burns, 'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself. He’s safe for these three hours.
O most dear mistress,The sun will set before I shall dischargeWhat I must strive to do.
If you’ll sit down,I’ll bear your logs the while. Pray, give me that.I’ll carry it to the pile.
No, precious creature. I had rather crack my sinews, break my back, Than you should such dishonor undergo While I sit lazy by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It would become me As well as it does you, and I should do it With much more ease, for my good will is to it And yours it is against.
[aside] Poor worm, thou art infected!This visitation shows it.
You look wearily.
No, noble mistress. 'Tis fresh morning with me When you are by at night. I do beseech you— Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers— What is your name?
Miranda. O my father,I have broke your hest to say so!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Admired Miranda! Indeed the top of admiration, worth What’s dearest to th' world! Full many a lady I have eyed with best regard and many a time Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues Have I liked several women. Never any With so full soul but some defect in her Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed And put it to the foil. But you, O you, So perfect and so peerless, are created Of every creature’s best.
I do not know One of my sex, no woman’s face remember— Save, from my glass, mine own. Nor have I seen More that I may call men than you, good friend, And my dear father. How features are abroad I am skill-less of, but, by my modesty, The jewel in my dower, I would not wish Any companion in the world but you, Nor can imagination form a shape Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle Something too wildly, and my father’s precepts I therein do forget.
I am in my condition A prince, Miranda—I do think, a king; I would, not so!—and would no more endure This wooden slavery than to suffer The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak. The very instant that I saw you did My heart fly to your service, there resides To make me slave to it, and for your sake Am I this patient log-man.
Do you love me?
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound And crown what I profess with kind event If I speak true! If hollowly, invert What best is boded me to mischief! I Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world Do love, prize, honor you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am a foolTo weep at what I am glad of.
[aside] Fair encounterOf two most rare affections! Heavens rain graceOn that which breeds between 'em!
Wherefore weep you?
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer What I desire to give, and much less take What I shall die to want. But this is trifling, And all the more it seeks to hide itself The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning, And prompt me, plain and holy innocence! I am your wife if you will marry me. If not, I’ll die your maid. To be your fellow You may deny me, but I’ll be your servant Whether you will or no.
My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My husband, then?
Ay, with a heart as willingAs bondage e'er of freedom. Here’s my hand.
And mine, with my heart in ’t. And now farewellTill half an hour hence.
A thousand thousand!
So glad of this as they I cannot be, Who are surprised withal. But my rejoicing At nothing can be more. I’ll to my book, For yet ere supper-time must I perform Much business appertaining.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Tell not me. When the butt is out, we will drink water.Not a drop before. Therefore bear up and board 'em.—Servant- monster, drink to me.
“Servant-monster?” The folly of this island. They say there’s but five upon this isle. We are three of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.
Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee. Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
Where should they be set else? He were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me. I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your lieutenant, if you list. He’s no standard.
We’ll not run, Monsieur Monster.
Nor go neither. But you’ll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.
Mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.
How does thy honor? Let me lick thy shoe. [indicates TRINCULO] I’ll not serve him. He’s not valiant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to CALIBAN] Thou liest, most ignorant monster. I am incase to justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I today? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?
[to STEPHANO] Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my lord?
“Lord,” quoth he? That a monster should be such a natural!
[to STEPHANO] Lo, lo, again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. If you provea mutineer, the next tree. The poor monster’s my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
Marry, will I. Kneel and repeat it. I will stand, and so shallTrinculo.
[kneeling] As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.
Thou liest.
[to TRINCULO] Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! I would my valiant master would destroy thee. I do not lie.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in ’s tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
Why, I said nothing.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
I say, by sorcery he got this isle. From me he got it. If thy greatness will Revenge it on him—for I know thou darest, But this thing dare not—
That’s most certain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou shalt be lord of it and I’ll serve thee.
How now shall this be compassed?Canst thou bring me to th' party?
Yea, yea, my lord. I’ll yield him thee asleep,Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.
Thou liest. Thou canst not.
What a pied ninny’s this! Thou scurvy patch! I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows And take his bottle from him. When that’s gone, He shall drink naught but brine, for I’ll not show him Where the quick freshes are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Trinculo, run into no further danger. Interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, I’ll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.
Why, what did I? I did nothing. I’ll go farther off.
Didst thou not say he lied?
Thou liest.
[to TRINCULO] Do I so? Take thou that. [beatsTRINCULO] As you like this, give me the lie another time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!
Ha, ha, ha!
Now, forward with your tale.—Prithee, stand farther off.
Beat him enough. After a little time,I’ll beat him too.
Stand farther.—Come, proceed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, as I told thee, ’tis a custom with him, I' th' afternoon to sleep. There thou mayst brain him, Having first seized his books; or with a log Batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake; Or cut his weasand with thy knife. Remember First to possess his books, for without them He’s but a sot, as I am, nor hath not One spirit to command. They all do hate him As rootedly as I. Burn but his books. He has brave utensils—for so he calls them— Which when he has a house, he’ll deck withal. And that most deeply to consider is The beauty of his daughter. He himself Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman, But only Sycorax my dam and she. But she as far surpasseth Sycorax As great’st does least.
Is it so brave a lass?
Ay, lord. She will become thy bed, I warrant.And bring thee forth brave brood.
Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queen—save our graces!—and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?
Excellent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Give me thy hand. I am sorry I beat thee. But while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
Within this half hour will he be asleep. Wilt thou destroy him then?
Ay, on mine honor.
[aside] This will I tell my master.
Thou makest me merry. I am full of pleasure. Let us be jocund. Will you troll the catch You taught me but whilere?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing. [sings] Flout 'em and scout 'em, And scout 'em and flout 'em. Thought is free.
That’s not the tune.
What is this same?
This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture ofNobody.
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. If thou beest a devil, take ’t as thou list.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, forgive me my sins!
He that dies pays all debts.—I defy thee!—Mercy upon us!
Art thou afeard?
No, monster, not I.
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises, Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not. Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices That, if I then had waked after long sleep, Will make me sleep again. And then, in dreaming, The clouds methought would open and show riches Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked I cried to dream again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.
When Prospero is destroyed.
That shall be by and by. I remember the story.
The sound is going away. Let’s follow it, and after do our work.
Lead, monster; we’ll follow. I would I could see this taborer. He lays it on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt come? I’ll follow, Stephano.
[to ALONSO] By 'r lakin, I can go no further, sir. My old bones ache. Here’s a maze trod indeed Through forthrights and meanders. By your patience, I needs must rest me.
Old lord, I cannot blame thee, Who am myself attached with weariness To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest. Even here I will put off my hope and keep it No longer for my flatterer. He is drowned Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
[aside to SEBASTIAN] I am right glad that he’s so out of hope.Do not, for one repulse, forego the purposeThat you resolved t' effect.
[aside to ANTONIO] The next advantageWill we take throughly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to SEBASTIAN] Let it be tonight, For now they are oppressed with travel. They Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance As when they are fresh.
[aside to ANTONIO] I say, tonight. No more.
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
Marvelous sweet music!
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A living drollery. Now I will believe That there are unicorns, that in Arabia There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix At this hour reigning there.
I’ll believe both And what does else want credit, come to me, And I’ll be sworn ’tis true. Travelers ne'er did lie, Though fools at home condemn 'em.
If in Naples I should report this now, would they believe me? If I should say, I saw such islanders— For, certes, these are people of the island— Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note, Their manners are more gentle-kind than of Our human generation you shall find Many—nay, almost any.
[aside] Honest lord,Thou hast said well, for some of you there presentAre worse than devils.
I cannot too much muse Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing, Although they want the use of tongue, a kind Of excellent dumb discourse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside] Praise in departing.
They vanished strangely.
No matter, sinceThey have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.Will ’t please you taste of what is here?
Not I.
Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys, Who would believe that there were mountaineers Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em Wallets of flesh, or that there were such men Whose heads stood in their breasts?—which now we find Each putter-out of five for one will bring us Good warrant of.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will stand to and feed, Although my last. No matter, since I feel The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke, Stand to and do as we.
[to ALONSO, ANTONIO, and SEBASTIAN] You are three men of sin, whom Destiny, That hath to instrument this lower world And what is in ’t, the never-surfeited sea Hath caused to belch up you— and on this island Where man doth not inhabit, you ’mongst men Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad, And even with suchlike valor men hang and drown Their proper selves. [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO draw their swords] You fools, I and my fellows Are ministers of fate. The elements Of whom your swords are tempered may as well Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs Kill the still-closing waters as diminish One dowl that’s in my plume. My fellow ministers Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt, Your swords are now too massy for your strengths And will not be uplifted. But remember— For that’s my business to you—that you three From Milan did supplant good Prospero, Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it, Him and his innocent child. For which foul deed The powers—delaying, not forgetting—have Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures, Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso, They have bereft, and do pronounce by me Lingering perdition, worse than any death Can be at once, shall step by step attend You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from— Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls Upon your heads—is nothing but hearts' sorrow And a clear life ensuing.
[aside] Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring. Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated In what thou hadst to say. So with good life And observation strange, my meaner ministers Their several kinds have done. My high charms work And these mine enemies are all knit up In their distractions. They now are in my power, And in these fits I leave them while I visit Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned, And his and mine loved darling.
[to ALONSO] I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand youIn this strange stare?
Oh, it is monstrous, monstrous. Methought the billows spoke and told me of it, The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder, That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass. Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded, and I’ll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded And with him there lie mudded.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But one fiend at a time,I’ll fight their legions o'er.
I’ll be thy second.
All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt, Like poison given to work a great time after, Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly And hinder them from what this ecstasy May now provoke them to.
Follow, I pray you.
[to FERDINAND] If I have too austerely punished you, Your compensation makes amends, for I Have given you here a third of mine own life— Or that for which I live— who once again I tender to thy hand. All thy vexations Were but my trials of thy love and thou Hast strangely stood the test. Here, afore heaven, I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand, Do not smile at me that I boast of her, For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise And make it halt behind her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do believe itAgainst an oracle.
Then as my gift and thine own acquisition Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But If thou dost break her virgin knot before All sanctimonious ceremonies may With full and holy rite be ministered, No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall To make this contract grow, but barren hate, Sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew The union of your bed with weeds so loathly That you shall hate it both. Therefore take heed, As Hymen’s lamps shall light you.
As I hope For quiet days, fair issue, and long life, With such love as ’tis now, the murkiest den, The most opportune place, the strong’st suggestion, Our worser genius can shall never melt Mine honor into lust to take away The edge of that day’s celebration When I shall think, or Phoebus' steeds are foundered, Or night kept chained below.
Fairly spoke.Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.What, Ariel! My industrious servant, Ariel!
What would my potent master? Here I am.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service Did worthily perform, and I must use you In such another trick. Go bring the rabble, O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place. Incite them to quick motion, for I must Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise, And they expect it from me.
Presently?
Ay, with a twink.
Before you can say “Come” and “Go,” And breathe twice and cry “So, so!” Each one, tripping on his toe, Will be here with mop and mow. Do you love me, master, no?
Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approachTill thou dost hear me call.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well, I conceive.
[to FERDINAND] Look thou be true. Do not give dalliance Too much the rein. The strongest oaths are straw To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious, Or else, goodnight your vow.
I warrant you, sir,The white cold virgin snow upon my heartAbates the ardor of my liver.
Well. Now come, my Ariel! Bring a corollary, Rather than want a spirit. Appear and pertly!— No tongue. All eyes! Be silent.
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas; Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep, And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep; Thy banks with pionèd and twillèd brims, Which spongy April at thy hest betrims To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves, Whose shadow the dismissèd bachelor loves, Being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard; And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard, Where thou thyself dost air— the Queen o' th' Sky, Whose watery arch and messenger am I, Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace, Here on this grass plot, in this very place, To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.
Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter; Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers; And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down, Rich scarf to my proud earth. Why hath thy queen Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?
A contract of true love to celebrate,And some donation freely to estateOn the blessed lovers.
Tell me, heavenly bow, If Venus or her son, as thou dost know, Do now attend the queen? Since they did plot The means that dusky Dis my daughter got, Her and her blind boy’s scandaled company I have forsworn.
Of her society Be not afraid. I met her deity Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have done Some wanton charm upon this man and maid, Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid Till Hymen’s torch be lighted—but in vain. Mars’s hot minion is returned again. Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows, Swears he will shoot no more, but play with sparrows And be a boy right out.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Highest queen of state,Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.
How does my bounteous sister? Go with meTo bless this twain that they may prosperous be,And honored in their issue.
Honor, riches, marriage, blessing, Long continuance, and increasing, Hourly joys be still upon you. Juno sings her blessings on you.
Earth’s increase, foison plenty, Barns and garners never empty, Vines and clustering bunches growing, Plants with goodly burden bowing— Spring come to you at the farthest In the very end of harvest. Scarcity and want shall shun you. Ceres' blessing so is on you.
This is a most majestic vision, and Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold To think these spirits?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Spirits, which by mine artI have from their confines called to enactMy present fancies.
Let me live here ever.So rare a wondered father and a wifeMakes this place paradise.
Sweet now, silence. Juno and Ceres whisper seriously. There’s something else to do. Hush and be mute, Or else our spell is marred.
You nymphs, called Naiads of the windring brooks, With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks, Leave your crisp channels and on this green land Answer your summons, Juno does command. Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate A contract of true love. Be not too late.
You sunburnt sicklemen of August weary, Come hither from the furrow and be merry. Make holiday. Your rye-straw hats put on, And these fresh nymphs encounter every one In country footing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I had forgot that foul conspiracy Of the beast Caliban and his confederates Against my life. The minute of their plot Is almost come.— Well done. Avoid, no more!
[to MIRANDA] This is strange. Your father’s in some passionThat works him strongly.
Never till this daySaw I him touched with anger so distempered.
[to FERDINAND] You do look, my son, in a moved sort, As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir. Our revels now are ended. These our actors, As I foretold you, were all spirits and Are melted into air, into thin air. And like the baseless fabric of this vision, The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, The solemn temples, the great globe itself, Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolve, And like this insubstantial pageant faded, Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed. Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled. Be not disturbed with my infirmity. If you be pleased, retire into my cell And there repose. A turn or two I’ll walk To still my beating mind.
We wish your peace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.
Thy thoughts I cleave to. What’s thy pleasure?
Spirit,We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,I thought to have told thee of it, but I fearedLest I might anger thee.
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking, So full of valor that they smote the air For breathing in their faces, beat the ground For kissing of their feet; yet always bending Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor, At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears, Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses As they smelt music. So I charmed their ears That, calflike, they my lowing followed through Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns, Which entered their frail shins. At last I left them I' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell, There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake O'erstunk their feet.
This was well done, my bird. Thy shape invisible retain thou still. The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither For stale to catch these thieves.
I go, I go.
A devil, a born devil on whose nature Nurture can never stick, on whom my pains, Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost. And as with age his body uglier grows, So his mind cankers. I will plague them all, Even to roaring.
Come, hang them on this line.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. We now are near his cell.
Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy,has done little better than played the jack with us.
Monster, I do smell all horse piss, at which my nose isin great indignation.
So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you—
Thou wert but a lost monster.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good my lord, give me thy favor still. Be patient, for the prize I’ll bring thee to Shall hoodwink this mischance. Therefore speak softly. All’s hushed as midnight yet.
Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool—
There is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.
That’s more to me than my wetting. Yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.
I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labor.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here, This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter. Do that good mischief which may make this island Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban, For aye thy foot-licker.
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.
[seeing the apparel] O King Stephano! O peer, O worthy Stephano, look what awardrobe here is for thee!
Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.
Oh, ho, monster, we know what belongs to a frippery.— [puts on a gown] O King Stephano!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Put off that gown, Trinculo. By this hand, I’ll have that gown.
Thy grace shall have it.
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean To dote thus on such luggage? Let’s alone, And do the murder first. If he awake, From toe to crown he’ll fill our skins with pinches, Make us strange stuff.
Be you quiet, monster.—Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line.—Now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.
Do, do. We steal by line and level, an ’t like your grace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank thee for that jest. Here’s a garment for ’t. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country. “Steal by line and level” is an excellent pass of pate. There’s another garment for ’t.
Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.
I will have none on ’t. We shall lose our time,And all be turned to barnacles or to apesWith foreheads villainous low.
Monster, lay to your fingers. Help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or I’ll turn you out of mykingdom. Go to, carry this.
And this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and this.
Hey, Mountain, hey!
Silver. There it goes, Silver!
Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there. Hark, hark!
Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews With agèd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them Than pard or cat o' mountain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hark, they roar.
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour Lie at my mercy all mine enemies. Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little Follow, and do me service.
Now does my project gather to a head. My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time Goes upright with his carriage. How’s the day?
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,You said our work should cease.
I did say so When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit, How fares the king and ’s followers?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Confined together In the same fashion as you gave in charge, Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir, In the line grove which weather-fends your cell. They cannot budge till your release. The king, His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted, And the remainder mourning over them, Brimful of sorrow and dismay. But chiefly Him that you termed, sir, “the good old Lord Gonzalo,” His tears run down his beard like winter’s drops From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em That if you now beheld them, your affections Would become tender.
Dost thou think so, spirit?
Mine would, sir, were I human.
And mine shall. Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling Of their afflictions, and shall not myself, One of their kind, that relish all as sharply Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick, Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury Do I take part. The rarer action is In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent, The sole drift of my purpose doth extend Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel. My charms I’ll break, their senses I’ll restore, And they shall be themselves.
I’ll fetch them, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][tracing a circle on the ground] Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves, And ye that on the sands with printless foot Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him When he comes back; you demi-puppets that By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimmed The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds, And ’twixt the green sea and the azured vault Set roaring war—to th' dread rattling thunder Have I given fire, and rifted Jove’s stout oak With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up The pine and cedar; graves at my command Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth By my so potent art. But this rough magic I here abjure, and when I have required Some heavenly music, which even now I do, To work mine end upon their senses that This airy charm is for, I’ll break my staff, Bury it certain fathoms in the earth, And deeper than did ever plummet sound I’ll drown my book.
A solemn air and the best comforter To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains, Now useless, boiled within thy skull. There stand, For you are spell-stopped. Holy Gonzalo, honorable man, Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine, Fall fellowly drops. The charm dissolves apace, And as the morning steals upon the night, Melting the darkness, so their rising senses Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle Their clearer reason. O good Gonzalo, My true preserver and a loyal sir To him you follow’st, I will pay thy graces Home both in word and deed. Most cruelly Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter. Thy brother was a furtherer in the act. Thou art pinched for ’t now, Sebastian. Flesh and blood, You brother mine, that entertained ambition, Expelled remorse and nature, whom, with Sebastian, Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong, Would here have killed your king—I do forgive thee, Unnatural though thou art. Their understanding Begins to swell, and the approaching tide Will shortly fill the reasonable shore That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them That yet looks on me, or would know me. Ariel, Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell. I will discase me, and myself present As I was sometime Milan. Quickly, spirit. Thou shalt ere long be free.
[sings and helps to attire PROSPERO] Where the bee sucks, there suck I. In a cowslip’s bell I lie. There I couch when owls do cry. On the bat’s back I do fly After summer merrily. Merrily, merrily shall I live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
Why, that’s my dainty Ariel. I shall miss thee, But yet thou shalt have freedom.—So, so, so.— To the king’s ship, invisible as thou art. There shalt thou find the mariners asleep Under the hatches. The Master and the Boatswain Being awake, enforce them to this place, And presently, I prithee.
I drink the air before me, and returnOr ere your pulse twice beat.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazementInhabits here. Some heavenly power guide usOut of this fearful country!
[to ALONSO] Behold, sir King, The wrongèd Duke of Milan, Prospero. For more assurance that a living prince Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body. And to thee and thy company I bid A hearty welcome. [embraces ALONSO]
Whe'er thou beest he or no, Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, As late I have been, I not know. Thy pulse Beats as of flesh and blood. And since I saw thee, Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which I fear a madness held me. This must crave— An if this be at all—a most strange story. Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero Be living and be here?
[to GONZALO] First, noble friend,Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannotBe measured or confined.
Whether this beOr be not, I’ll not swear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You do yet taste Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all. [aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO] But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded, I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you And justify you traitors. At this time I will tell no tales.
The devil speaks in him.
No.— [to ANTONIO] For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive Thy rankest fault, all of them, a nd require My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know, Thou must restore.
If thou beest Prospero, Give us particulars of thy preservation, How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost— How sharp the point of this remembrance is! My dear son Ferdinand.
I am woe for ’t, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Irreparable is the loss, and patienceSays it is past her cure.
I rather think You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace For the like loss I have her sovereign aid, And rest myself content.
You the like loss?
As great to me as late. And, supportable To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker Than you may call to comfort you, for I Have lost my daughter.
A daughter? O heavens, that they were living both in Naples, The king and queen there! That they were, I wish Myself were mudded in that oozy bed Where my son lies.—When did you lose your daughter?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In this last tempest. I perceive these lords At this encounter do so much admire That they devour their reason and scarce think Their eyes do offices of truth, their words Are natural breath. But howsoev'r you have Been justled from your senses, know for certain That I am Prospero and that very duke Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely Upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed, To be the lord on ’t. No more yet of this, For ’tis a chronicle of day by day, Not a relation for a breakfast, nor Befitting this first meeting. [to ALONSO] Welcome, sir. This cell’s my court. Here have I few attendants And subjects none abroad. Pray you, look in. My dukedom since you have given me again, I will requite you with as good a thing, At least bring forth a wonder to content ye As much as me my dukedom.
[to FERDINAND] Sweet lord, you play me false.
No, my dearest love,I would not for the world.
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,And I would call it fair play.
If this proveA vision of the Island, one dear sonShall I twice lose.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A most high miracle!
[seeing ALONSO and kneeling] Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.I have cursed them without cause.
Now all the blessings Of a glad father, compass thee about. Arise, and say how thou camest here.
Oh, wonder! How many goodly creatures are there here! How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world, That has such people in ’t!
'Tis new to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to FERDINAND] What is this maid with whom thou wast at play? Your eld’st acquaintance cannot be three hours. Is she the goddess that hath severed us And brought us thus together?
Sir, she is mortal. But by immortal providence, she’s mine. I chose her when I could not ask my father For his advice, nor thought I had one. She Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan, Of whom so often I have heard renown But never saw before, of whom I have Received a second life. And second father This lady makes him to me.
I am hers.But oh, how oddly will it sound that IMust ask my child forgiveness!
There, sir, stop.Let us not burden our remembrances withA heaviness that’s gone.
I have inly wept, Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you gods, And on this couple drop a blessèd crown, For it is you that have chalked forth the way Which brought us hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I say, amen, Gonzalo.
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice Beyond a common joy, and set it down With gold on lasting pillars. In one voyage Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis; And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife Where he himself was lost; Prospero, his dukedom In a poor isle; and all of us, ourselves When no man was his own.
[to FERDINAND and MIRANDA] Give me your hands.Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heartThat doth not wish you joy.
Be it so. Amen.
Oh, look, sir, look, sir! Here is more of us. I prophesied if a gallows were on land, This fellow could not drown. [To BOATSWAIN] Now, blasphemy, That swear’st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore? Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The best news is that we have safely found Our king and company. The next, our ship— Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split— Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when We first put out to sea.
[aside to PROSPERO] Sir, all this serviceHave I done since I went.
[aside to ARIEL] My tricksy spirit!
These are not natural events. They strengthenFrom strange to stranger.— [to BOATSWAIN] Say, how came you hither?
If I did think, sir, I were well awake, I’d strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep And—how, we know not—all clapped under hatches, Where but even now with strange and several noises Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, And more diversity of sounds, all horrible, We were awaked, straightway at liberty, Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld Our royal, good, and gallant ship, our Master Capering to eye her. On a trice, so please you, Even in a dream were we divided from them And were brought moping hither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][aside to PROSPERO] Was ’t well done?
[aside to ARIEL] Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod, And there is in this business more than nature Was ever conduct of. Some oracle Must rectify our knowledge.
Sir, my liege, Do not infest your mind with beating on The strangeness of this business. At picked leisure Which shall be shortly, single I’ll resolve you— Which to you shall seem probable—of every These happened accidents. Till when, be cheerful And think of each thing well. [aside to ARIEL] Come hither, spirit. Set Caliban and his companions free. Untie the spell.
How fares my gracious sir? There are yet missing of your company Some few odd lads that you remember not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. Coraggio, bully-monster, coraggio!
If these be true spies which I wear in my head, here’s a goodly sight.
O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! How fine my master is! I am afraid He will chastise me.
Ha, ha!What things are these, my lord Antonio?Will money buy 'em?
Very like. One of themIs a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Mark but the badges of these men, my lords, Then say if they be true. [indicates CALIBAN] This misshapen knave, His mother was a witch, and one so strong That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, And deal in her command without her power. These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil— For he’s a bastard one—had plotted with them To take my life. Two of these fellows you Must know and own. This thing of darkness I Acknowledge mine.
I shall be pinched to death.
Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
He is drunk now. Where had he wine?
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?— How camest thou in this pickle?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that,I fear me, will never out of my bones. I shall not fearflyblowing.
Why, how now, Stephano?
O, touch me not. I am not Stephano, but a cramp.
You’d be king o' th' isle, sirrah?
I should have been a sore one then.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][indicating CALIBAN] This is a strange thing as e'er I looked on.
He is as disproportioned in his manners As in his shape.— [to CALIBAN] Go, sirrah, to my cell. Take with you your companions. As you look To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
Ay, that I will. And I’ll be wise hereafter And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass Was I, to take this drunkard for a god And worship this dull fool!
Go to, away.
[to STEPHANO and TRINCULO] Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or stole it, rather.
Sir, I invite your highness and your train To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest For this one night, which—part of it—I’ll waste With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it Go quick away: the story of my life And the particular accidents gone by Since I came to this isle. And in the morn I’ll bring you to your ship and so to Naples, Where I have hope to see the nuptial Of these our dear-belovèd solemnized, And thence retire me to my Milan, where Every third thought shall be my grave.
I longTo hear the story of your life, which mustTake the ear strangely.
I’ll deliver all, And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales, And sail so expeditious that shall catch Your royal fleet far off.— [aside to ARIEL] My Ariel, chick, That is thy charge. Then to the elements Be free, and fare thou well!— Please you, draw near.
Now my charms are all o'erthrown, And what strength I have’s mine own, Which is most faint. Now, ’tis true, I must be here confined by you, Or sent to Naples. Let me not, Since I have my dukedom got And pardoned the deceiver, dwell In this bare island by your spell, But release me from my bands With the help of your good hands. Gentle breath of yours my sails Must fill, or else my project fails, Which was to please. Now I want Spirits to enforce, art to enchant, And my ending is despair, Unless I be relieved by prayer, Which pierces so that it assaults Mercy itself and frees all faults. As you from crimes would pardoned be, Let your indulgence set me free.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus: Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits. Were't not affection chains thy tender days To the sweet glances of thy honour'd love, I rather would entreat thy company To see the wonders of the world abroad, Than, living dully sluggardized at home, Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness. But since thou lovest, love still and thrive therein, Even as I would when I to love begin.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu! Think on thy Proteus, when thou haply seest Some rare note-worthy object in thy travel: Wish me partaker in thy happiness When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger, If ever danger do environ thee, Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers, For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
And on a love-book pray for my success?
Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
That's on some shallow story of deep love:How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's a deep story of a deeper love:For he was more than over shoes in love.
'Tis true; for you are over boots in love,And yet you never swum the Hellespont.
Over the boots? Nay, give me not the boots.
No, I will not, for it boots thee not.
What?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To be in love, where scorn is bought with groans; Coy looks with heart-sore sighs; one fading moment's mirth With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights: If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain; If lost, why then a grievous labour won; However, but a folly bought with wit, Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
'Tis love you cavil at: I am not Love.
Love is your master, for he masters you: And he that is so yoked by a fool, Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud The eating canker dwells, so eating love Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
And writers say, as the most forward bud Is eaten by the canker ere it blow, Even so by love the young and tender wit Is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud, Losing his verdure even in the prime And all the fair effects of future hopes. But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee, That art a votary to fond desire? Once more adieu! My father at the road Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd .
And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our leave. To Milan let me hear from thee by letters Of thy success in love, and what news else Betideth here in absence of thy friend; And likewise will visit thee with mine.
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As much to you at home! And so, farewell.
He after honour hunts, I after love: He leaves his friends to dignify them more, I leave myself, my friends and all, for love. Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me, Made me neglect my studies, lose my time, War with good counsel, set the world at nought; Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan.
Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, a sheep doth very often stray,An if the shepherd be a while away.
You conclude that my master is a shepherd, then,and I a sheep?
I do.
Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
A silly answer and fitting well a sheep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This proves me still a sheep.
True; and thy master a shepherd.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me: therefore I am no sheep.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master; thy master for wages follows not thee: therefore thou art a sheep.
Such another proof will make me cry 'baa.'
But, dost thou hear? Gavest thou my letter to Julia?
Ay sir: I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing for my labour.
Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.
Nay: in that you are astray, 'twere best pound you.
Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me forcarrying your letter.
You mistake; I mean the pound,—a pinfold.
From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over, 'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But what said she?
[First nodding] Ay.
Nod—Ay—why, that's noddy.
You mistook, sir; I say, she did nod: and you askme if she did nod; and I say, 'Ay.'
And that set together is noddy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now you have taken the pains to set it together,take it for your pains.
No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.
Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.
Why sir, how do you bear with me?
Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly; having nothingbut the word 'noddy' for my pains.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
Come come, open the matter in brief: what said she?
Open your purse, that the money and the matter maybe both at once delivered.
Well, sir, here is for your pains. What said she?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her; no, not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter: and being so hard to me that brought your mind, I fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling your mind. Give her no token but stones; for she's as hard as steel.
What said she? Nothing?
No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.' To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have testerned me ; in requital whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself : and so, sir, I'll commend you to my master.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck, Which cannot perish having thee aboard, Being destined to a drier death on shore.
I must go send some better messenger: I fear my Julia would not deign my lines, Receiving them from such a worthless post.
But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.
Of all the fair resort of gentlemen That every day with parle encounter me, In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Please you repeat their names, I'll show my mindAccording to my shallow simple skill.
What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
As of a knight well-spoken, neat and fine;But, were I you, he never should be mine.
What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth; but of himself, so so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
Lord, Lord! To see what folly reigns in us!
How now! What means this passion at his name?
Pardon, dear madam: 'tis a passing shame That I, unworthy body as I am, Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then thus: of many good I think him best.
Your reason?
I have no other, but a woman's reason;I think him so because I think him so.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why he, of all the rest, hath never moved me.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
His little speaking shows his love but small.
Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
They do not love that do not show their love.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, they love least that let men know their love.
I would I knew his mind.
Peruse this paper, madam.
'To Julia.' Say, from whom?
That the contents will show.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say, say, who gave it thee?
Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from Proteus. He would have given it you; but I, being in the way, Did in your name receive it: pardon the fault I pray.
Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker! Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines? To whisper and conspire against my youth? Now, trust me, 'tis an office of great worth And you an officer fit for the place. There, take the paper; see it be returned, Or else return no more into my sight.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
Will ye be gone?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That you may ruminate.
And yet I would I had o'erlooked the letter: It were a shame to call her back again And pray her to a fault for which I chid her. What a fool is she, that knows I am a maid, And would not force the letter to my view! Since maids, in modesty, say 'no' to that Which they would have the profferer construe 'ay.' Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love That, like a testy babe, will scratch the nurse And presently all humbled kiss the rod! How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence, When willingly I would have had her here! How angerly I taught my brow to frown, When inward joy enforced my heart to smile! My penance is to call Lucetta back And ask remission for my folly past. What ho! Lucetta!
What would your ladyship?
Is't near dinner-time?
I would it were,That you might kill your stomach on your meatAnd not upon your maid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is't that you took up so gingerly?
Nothing.
Why didst thou stoop, then?
To take a paper up that I let fall.
And is that paper nothing?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nothing concerning me.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
Madam, it will not lie where it concernsUnless it have a false interpeter.
Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.Give me a note: your ladyship can set.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As little by such toys as may be possible.Best sing it to the tune of 'Light o' love.'
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy! Belike it hath some burden then?
Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
And why not you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot reach so high.
Let's see your song. How now, minion!
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out:And yet methinks I do not like this tune.
You do not?
No, madam; it is too sharp.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You, minion, are too saucy.
Nay, now you are too flat And mar the concord with too harsh a descant: There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
The mean is drown'd with your unruly bass.
Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.Here is a coil with protestation!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go get you gone, and let the papers lie:You would be fingering them, to anger me.
She makes it strange; but she would be best pleasedTo be so anger'd with another letter.
Nay, would I were so anger'd with the same! O hateful hands, to tear such loving words! Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey And kill the bees that yield it with your stings! I'll kiss each several paper for amends. Look, here is writ 'kind Julia.' Unkind Julia! As in revenge of thy ingratitude, I throw thy name against the bruising stones, Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain. And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus.' Poor wounded name! My bosom as a bed Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly heal'd; And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss. But twice or thrice was 'Proteus' written down. Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away Till I have found each letter in the letter, Except mine own name: that some whirlwind bear Unto a ragged fearful-hanging rock And throw it thence into the raging sea! Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ, 'Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus, To the sweet Julia:' that I'll tear away. And yet I will not, sith so prettily He couples it to his complaining names. Thus will I fold them one on another: Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Madam,Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
Well, let us go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
If you respect them, best to take them up.
Nay, I was taken up for laying them down:Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.
I see you have a month's mind to them.
Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;I see things too, although you judge I wink.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Come, come; will't please you go?
Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was thatWherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.
Why, what of him?
He wonder'd that your lordship Would suffer him to spend his youth at home, While other men, of slender reputation, Put forth their sons to seek preferment out: Some to the wars, to try their fortune there; Some to discover islands far away; Some to the studious universities. For any or for all these exercises, He said that Proteus your son was meet, And did request me to importune you To let him spend his time no more at home, Which would be great impeachment to his age, In having known no travel in his youth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nor need'st thou much importune me to that Whereon this month I have been hammering. I have consider'd well his loss of time And how he cannot be a perfect man, Not being tried and tutor'd in the world: Experience is by industry achieved And perfected by the swift course of time. Then tell me, whither were I best to send him?
I think your lordship is not ignorantHow his companion, youthful Valentine,Attends the emperor in his royal court.
I know it well.
'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither: There shall he practise tilts and tournaments, Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen. And be in eye of every exercise Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.
I like thy counsel; well hast thou advised: And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it, The execution of it shall make known. Even with the speediest expedition I will dispatch him to the emperor's court.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso, With other gentlemen of good esteem, Are journeying to salute the emperor And to commend their service to his will.
Good company; with them shall Proteus go:And, in good time! Now will we break with him.
Sweet love! Sweet lines! Sweet life! Here is her hand, the agent of her heart; Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn. O, that our fathers would applaud our loves, To seal our happiness with their consents! O heavenly Julia!
How now! What letter are you reading there?
May't please your lordship, 'tis a word or two Of commendations sent from Valentine, Deliver'd by a friend that came from him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lend me the letter; let me see what news.
There is no news, my lord, but that he writes How happily he lives, how well beloved And daily graced by the emperor; Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how stand you affected to his wish?
As one relying on your lordship's willAnd not depending on his friendly wish.
My will is something sorted with his wish. Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed; For what I will, I will, and there an end. I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time With Valentinus in the emperor's court: What maintenance he from his friends receives, Like exhibition thou shalt have from me. To-morrow be in readiness to go: Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, I cannot be so soon provided:Please you, deliberate a day or two.
Look, what thou want'st shall be sent after thee: No more of stay! To-morrow thou must go. Come on, Panthino: you shall be employ'd To hasten on his expedition.
Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning, And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd. I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter, Lest he should take exceptions to my love; And with the vantage of mine own excuse Hath he excepted most against my love. O, how this spring of love resembleth The uncertain glory of an April day, Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, And by and by a cloud takes all away!
Sir Proteus, your father calls for you:He is in haste; therefore, I pray you to go.
Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto,And yet a thousand times it answers 'no.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, your glove.
Not mine; my gloves are on.
Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.
Ha! Let me see: ay, give it me, it's mine: Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine! Ah, Silvia, Silvia!
Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, sirrah?
She is not within hearing, sir.
Why, sir, who bade you call her?
Your worship, sir; or else I mistook.
Well, you'll still be too forward.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
Go to, sir: tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
She that your worship loves?
Why, how know you that I am in love?
Marry, by these special marks: first, you havelearned, like Sir Proteus, to wreathe your arms,like a malecontent; to relish a love-song, like arobin-redbreast; to walk alone, like one that had the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy that had lost his A B C; to weep, like a young wench that had buried her grandam; to fast, like one that takes diet; to watch like one that fears robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walked, to walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently after dinner; when you looked sadly, it was for want of money: and now you are metamorphosed with a mistress, that, when I look on you, I can hardly think you my master .
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are all these things perceived in me?
They are all perceived without ye.
Without me? They cannot.
Without you? Nay, that's certain, for, without you were so simple, none else would: but you are so without these follies, that these follies are within you and shine through you like the water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a physician to comment on your malady.
But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?
Hast thou observed that? Even she, I mean.
Why, sir, I know her not.
Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yetknowest her not?
Is she not hard-favoured, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Not so fair, boy, as well-favoured.
Sir, I know that well enough.
What dost thou know?
That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favoured.
I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour infinite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's because the one is painted and the other outof all count.
How painted? And how out of count?
Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that noman counts of her beauty.
How esteemest thou me? I account of her beauty.
You never saw her since she was deformed.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How long hath she been deformed?
Ever since you loved her.
I have loved her ever since I saw her; and still Isee her beautiful.
If you love her, you cannot see her.
Why?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Because Love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes; or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going ungartered!
What should I see then?
Your own present folly and her passing deformity: for he, being in love, could not see to garter his hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on yourhose.
Belike, boy, then, you are in love; for lastmorning you could not see to wipe my shoes.
T rue, sir; I was in love with my bed: I thank you, you swinged me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for yours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
Last night she enjoined me to write some lines toone she loves.
And have you?
I have.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are they not lamely writ?
No, boy, but as well as I can do them. Peace!Here she comes.
[Aside] O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!Now will he interpret to her.
Madam and mistress, a thousand good-morrows.
[Aside] O, give ye good even! Here's a million of manners.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
[Aside] He should give her interest and she gives it him.
As you enjoin'd me, I have writ your letter Unto the secret nameless friend of yours; Which I was much unwilling to proceed in But for my duty to your ladyship.
I thank you gentle servant: 'tis very clerkly done.
Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off; For being ignorant to whom it goes I writ at random, very doubtfully.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
No, madam; so it stead you, I will writePlease you command, a thousand times as much; And yet—
A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel; And yet I will not name it; and yet I care not; And yet take this again; and yet I thank you, Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
[Aside] And yet you will; and yet another 'yet.'
What means your ladyship? Do you not like it?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ; But since unwillingly, take them again. Nay, take them.
Madam, they are for you.
Ay, ay: you writ them, sir, at my request; But I will none of them; they are for you; I would have had them writ more movingly.
Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.
And when it's writ, for my sake read it over,And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it please me, madam, what then?
Why, if it please you, take it for your labour:And so, good morrow, servant.
O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible, As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple! My master sues to her, and she hath taught her suitor, He being her pupil, to become her tutor. O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better, That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
How now, sir? What are you reasoning with yourself?
Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To do what?
To be a spokesman for Madam Silvia.
To whom?
To yourself: why, she wooes you by a figure.
What figure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By a letter, I should say.
Why, she hath not writ to me?
What need she, when she hath made you write toyourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?
No, believe me.
No believing you, indeed, sir. But did you perceiveher earnest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She gave me none, except an angry word.
Why, she hath given you a letter.
That's the letter I writ to her friend.
And that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.
I would it were no worse.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll warrant you, 'tis as well: For often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty, Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply; Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover, Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover. All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. Why muse you, sir? 'Tis dinner-time.
I have dined.
Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon Love can feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my victuals, and would fain have meat. O, be not like your mistress; be moved, be moved.
Have patience, gentle Julia.
I must, where is no remedy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When possibly I can, I will return.
If you turn not, you will return the sooner.Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.
Why then, we'll make exchange; here, take you this.
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
Here is my hand for my true constancy; And when that hour o'erslips me in the day Wherein I sigh not , Julia, for thy sake, The next ensuing hour some foul mischance Torment me for my love's forgetfulness! My father stays my coming; answer not; The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of tears; That tide will stay me longer than I should. Julia, farewell!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, gone without a word? Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak; For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
Sir Proteus, you are stay'd for.
Go; I come, I come.Alas! This parting strikes poor lovers dumb.
Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all the kind of the Lances have this very fault. I have received my proportion, like the prodigious son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial's court. I think Crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, and all our house in a great perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear: he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and has no more pity in him than a dog: a Jew would have wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam, having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my parting. Nay, I'll show you the manner of it. This shoe is my father: no, this left shoe is my father: no, no, this left shoe is my mother: nay, that cannot be so neither: yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole. This shoe, with the hole in it, is my mother, and this my father; a vengeance on't! There 'tis: now, sit, this staff is my sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand: this hat is Nan, our maid: I am the dog: no, the dog is himself, and I am the dog—Oh! The dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so. Now come I to my father; Father, your blessing: now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping: now should I kiss my father; well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother: O, that she could speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her; why, there 'tis; here's my mother's breath up and down. Now come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my tears.
Launce, away, away, aboard! Thy master is shipped and thou art to post after with oars. What's the matter? Why weepest thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide, if you tarry any longer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is theunkindest tied that ever any man tied.
What's the unkindest tide?
Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood, and, in losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy service,—Why dost thou stop my mouth?
For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Where should I lose my tongue?
In thy tale.
In thy tail!
Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.
Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, call me what thou darest.
Wilt thou go?
Well, I will go.
Servant!
Mistress?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Master, Sir Turio frowns on you.
Ay, boy, it's for love.
Not of you.
Of my mistress, then.
'Twere good you knocked him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Servant, you are sad.
Indeed, madam, I seem so.
Seem you that you are not?
Haply I do.
So do counterfeits.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So do you.
What seem I that I am not?
Wise.
What instance of the contrary?
Your folly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And how quote you my folly?
I quote it in your jerkin.
My jerkin is a doublet.
Well, then, I'll double your folly.
How?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What, angry, Sir Turio! Do you change colour?
Give him leave, madam; he is a kind of chameleon.
That hath more mind to feed on your blood than livein your air.
You have said, sir.
Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know it well, sir; you always end ere you begin.
A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
'Tis indeed, madam; we thank the giver.
Who is that, servant?
Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire. Sir Turio borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks, and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shallmake your wit bankrupt.
I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words, and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers, for it appears by their bare liveries, that they live by your bare words.
No more, gentlemen, no more:—here comes my father.
Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset. Sir Valentine, your father's in good health: What say you to a letter from your friends Of much good news?
My lord, I will be thankful.To any happy messenger from thence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?
Ay, my good lord, I know the gentlemanTo be of worth and worthy estimationAnd not without desert so well reputed.
Hath he not a son?
Ay, my good lord; a son that well deservesThe honour and regard of such a father.
You know him well?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know him as myself; for from our infancy We have conversed and spent our hours together: And though myself have been an idle truant, Omitting the sweet benefit of time To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection, Yet hath Sir Proteus, for that's his name, Made use and fair advantage of his days; His years but young, but his experience old; His head unmellow'd, but his judgment ripe; And, in a word, for far behind his worth Comes all the praises that I now bestow, He is complete in feature and in mind With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good, He is as worthy for an empress' love As meet to be an emperor's counsellor. Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me, With commendation from great potentates; And here he means to spend his time awhile: I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.
Should I have wish'd a thing, it had been he.
Welcome him then according to his worth. Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Turio; For Valentine, I need not cite him to it: I will send him hither to you presently.
This is the gentleman I told your ladyship Had come along with me, but that his mistress Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Belike that now she hath enfranchised themUpon some other pawn for fealty.
Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
Nay, then he should be blind; and, being blindHow could he see his way to seek out you?
Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To see such lovers, Turio, as yourself:Upon a homely object Love can wink.
Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you,Confirm his welcome with some special favour.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from.
Mistress, it is: sweet lady, entertain himTo be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Too low a mistress for so high a servant.
Not so, sweet lady: but too mean a servantTo have a look of such a worthy mistress.
Leave off discourse of disability:Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
My duty will I boast of; nothing else.
And duty never yet did want his meed:Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll die on him that says so but yourself.
That you are welcome?
That you are worthless.
Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
I wait upon his pleasure. Come, Sir Turio, Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome: I'll leave you to confer of home affairs; When you have done, we look to hear from you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll both attend upon your ladyship.
Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?
Your friends are well and have them much commended.
And how do yours?
I left them all in health.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How does your lady? And how thrives your love?
My tales of love were wont to weary you;I know you joy not in a love discourse.
Ay, Proteus, but that life is alter'd now: I have done penance for condemning Love, Whose high imperious thoughts have punish'd me With bitter fasts, with penitential groans, With nightly tears and daily heart-sore sighs; For in revenge of my contempt of love, Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow. O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord, And hath so humbled me , as, I confess, There is no woe to his correction, Nor to his service no such joy on earth. Now no discourse, except it be of love; Now can I break my fast, dine, sup and sleep, Upon the very naked name of love.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.Was this the idol that you worship so?
Even she; and is she not a heavenly saint?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No; but she is an earthly paragon.
Call her divine.
I will not flatter her.
O, flatter me; for love delights in praises.
When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,And I must minister the like to you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then speak the truth by her; if not divine, Yet let her be a principality, Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
Except my mistress.
Sweet, except not any;Except thou wilt except against my love.
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
And I will help thee to prefer her too: She shall be dignified with this high honour— To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss And, of so great a favour growing proud, Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower And make rough winter everlastingly.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
Pardon me, Proteus: all I can is nothingTo her whose worth makes other worthies nothing;She is alone.
Then let her alone.
Not for the world: why, man, she is mine own, And I as rich in having such a jewel As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, The water nectar and the rocks pure gold. Forgive me that I do not dream on thee, Because thou see'st me dote upon my love. My foolish rival, that her father likes Only for his possessions are so huge, Is gone with her along, and I must after, For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
But she loves you?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and we are betroth'd: nay, more, our, marriage-hour, With all the cunning manner of our flight, Determined of; how I must climb her window, The ladder made of cords, and all the means Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness. Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber, In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
Go on before; I shall inquire you forth: I must unto the road, to disembark Some necessaries that I needs must use, And then I'll presently attend you.
Will you make haste?
I will.
Even as one heat another heat expels, Or as one nail by strength drives out another, So the remembrance of my former love Is by a newer object quite forgotten. Is it mine, or Valentine's praise, Her true perfection, or my false transgression, That makes me reasonless to reason thus? She is fair; and so is Julia that I love— That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd; Which, like a waxen image, 'gainst a fire, Bears no impression of the thing it was. Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold, And that I love him not as I was wont. O, but I love his lady too too much, And that's the reason I love him so little. How shall I dote on her with more advice, That thus without advice begin to love her! 'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld, And that hath dazzled my reason's light; But when I look on her perfections, There is no reason but I shall be blind. If I can cheque my erring love, I will; If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lance! By mine honesty, welcome to Milan!
Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never undone till he be hanged, nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess say 'Welcome!'
Come on, you madcap, I'll to the alehouse with you presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did thy master part with Madam Julia?
Marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted veryfairly in jest.
But shall she marry him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No.
How then? Shall he marry her?
No, neither.
What, are they broken?
No, they are both as whole as a fish.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, then, how stands the matter with them?
Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, itstands well with her.
What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
What a block art thou, that thou canst not! Mystaff understands me.
What thou sayest?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and what I do too: look thee, I'll but lean,and my staff understands me.
It stands under thee, indeed.
Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
But tell me true, will't be a match?
Ask my dog: if he say ay, it will! If he say no,it will; if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The conclusion is then that it will.
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.
'Tis well that I get it so. But, Lance, how sayestthou, that my master is become a notable lover?
I never knew him otherwise.
Than how?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistakest me.
Why, fool, I meant not thee; I meant thy master.
I tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.
Why, I tell thee, I care not though he burn himself in love. If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why?
Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as togo to the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
At thy service.
To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn; To love fair Silvia, shall I be forsworn; To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn; And even that power which gave me first my oath Provokes me to this threefold perjury; Love bade me swear and Love bids me forswear. O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned, Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it! At first I did adore a twinkling star, But now I worship a celestial sun. Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken, And he wants wit that wants resolved will To learn his wit to exchange the bad for better. Fie, fie, unreverend tongue! To call her bad, Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths. I cannot leave to love, and yet I do; But there I leave to love where I should love. Julia I lose and Valentine I lose: If I keep them, I needs must lose myself; If I lose them, thus find I by their loss For Valentine myself, for Julia Silvia. I to myself am dearer than a friend, For love is still most precious in itself; And Silvia—witness Heaven, that made her fair!— Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope. I will forget that Julia is alive, Remembering that my love to her is dead; And Valentine I'll hold an enemy, Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend. I cannot now prove constant to myself, Without some treachery used to Valentine. This night he meaneth with a corded ladder To climb celestial Silvia's chamber-window, Myself in counsel, his competitor. Now presently I'll give her father notice Of their disguising and pretended flight; Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine; For Turio, he intends, shall wed his daughter; But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross By some sly trick blunt Turio's dull proceeding. Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift, As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift!
Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me; And even in kind love I do conjure thee, Who art the table wherein all my thoughts Are visibly character'd and engraved, To lesson me and tell me some good mean How, with my honour, I may undertake A journey to my loving Proteus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps; Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly, And when the flight is made to one so dear, Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food? Pity the dearth that I have pined in, By longing for that food so long a time. Didst thou but know the inly touch of love, Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,But qualify the fire's extreme rage,Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The more thou damm'st it up, the more it burns. The current that with gentle murmur glides, Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage; But when his fair course is not hindered, He makes sweet music with the enamell'ed stones, Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge He overtaketh in his pilgrimage, And so by many winding nooks he strays With willing sport to the wild ocean. Then let me go and hinder not my course I'll be as patient as a gentle stream And make a pastime of each weary step, Till the last step have brought me to my love; And there I'll rest, as after much turmoil A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
But in what habit will you go along?
Not like a woman; for I would prevent The loose encounters of lascivious men: Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds As may beseem some well-reputed page.
Why, then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
No, girl, I'll knit it up in silken strings With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots. To be fantastic may become a youth Of greater time than I shall show to be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What fashion, madam shall I make your breeches?
That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord, What compass will you wear your farthingale?' Why even what fashion thou best likest, Lucetta.
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
Out, out, Lucetta! That would be ill-favour'd.
A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lucetta, as thou lovest me, let me have What thou thinkest meet and is most mannerly. But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me For undertaking so unstaid a journey? I fear me, it will make me scandalized.
If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
Nay, that I will not.
Then never dream on infamy, but go. If Proteus like your journey when you come, No matter who's displeased when you are gone: I fear me, he will scarce be pleased withal.
That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear: A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears And instances of infinite of love Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All these are servants to deceitful men.
Base men, that use them to so base effect! But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles, His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate, His tears pure messengers sent from his heart, His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
Pray heaven he prove so, when you come to him!
Now, as thou lovest me, do him not that wrong To bear a hard opinion of his truth: Only deserve my love by loving him; And presently go with me to my chamber, To take a note of what I stand in need of, To furnish me upon my longing journey. All that is mine I leave at thy dispose, My goods, my lands, my reputation; Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence. Come, answer not, but to it presently! I am impatient of my tarriance.
Sir Turio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;We have some secrets to confer about.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now, tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?
My gracious lord, that which I would discover The law of friendship bids me to conceal; But when I call to mind your gracious favours Done to me, undeserving as I am, My duty pricks me on to utter that Which else no worldly good should draw from me. Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend, This night intends to steal away your daughter: Myself am one made privy to the plot. I know you have determined to bestow her On Turio, whom your gentle daughter hates; And should she thus be stol'n away from you, It would be much vexation to your age. Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose To cross my friend in his intended drift Than, by concealing it, heap on your head A pack of sorrows which would press you down, Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care; Which to requite, command me while I live. This love of theirs myself have often seen, Haply when they have judged me fast asleep, And oftentimes have purposed to forbid Sir Valentine her company and my court: But fearing lest my jealous aim might err And so unworthily disgrace the man, A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd, I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find That which thyself hast now disclosed to me. And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this, Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested, I nightly lodge her in an upper tower, The key whereof myself have ever kept; And thence she cannot be convey'd away.
Know, noble lord, they have devised a mean How he her chamber-window will ascend And with a corded ladder fetch her down; For which the youthful lover now is gone And this way comes he with it presently; Where, if it please you, you may intercept him. But, good my Lord, do it so cunningly That my discovery be not aimed at; For love of you, not hate unto my friend, Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
Upon mine honour, he shall never knowThat I had any light from thee of this.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Adieu, my Lord; Sir Valentine is coming.
Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
Please it your grace, there is a messengerThat stays to bear my letters to my friends,And I am going to deliver them.
Be they of much import?
The tenor of them doth but signifyMy health and happy being at your court.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile; I am to break with thee of some affairs That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret. 'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought To match my friend Sir Turio to my daughter.
I know it well, my Lord; and, sure, the match Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman Is full of virtue, bounty, worth and qualities Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter: Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?
No, trust me; she is peevish, sullen, froward, Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty, Neither regarding that she is my child Nor fearing me as if I were her father; And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers, Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her; And, where I thought the remnant of mine age Should have been cherish'd by her child-like duty, I now am full resolved to take a wife And turn her out to who will take her in: Then let her beauty be her wedding-dower; For me and my possessions she esteems not.
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
There is a lady in Verona here Whom I affect; but she is nice and coy And nought esteems my aged eloquence: Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor— For long agone I have forgot to court; Besides, the fashion of the time is changed— How and which way I may bestow myself To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:Dumb jewels often in their silent kindMore than quick words do move a woman's mind.
But she did scorn a present that I sent her.
A woman sometimes scorns what best contents her. Send her another; never give her o'er; For scorn at first makes after-love the more. If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you, But rather to beget more love in you: If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone; For why, the fools are mad, if left alone. Take no repulse, whatever she doth say; For 'get you gone,' she doth not mean 'away!' Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces; Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces. That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man, If with his tongue he cannot win a woman .
But she I mean is promised by her friends Unto a youthful gentleman of worth, And kept severely from resort of men, That no man hath access by day to her.
Why, then, I would resort to her by night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe,That no man hath recourse to her by night.
What lets but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,And built so shelving that one cannot climb itWithout apparent hazard of his life.
Why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords,To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,Would serve to scale another Hero's tower,So bold Leander would adventure it.
Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood,Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When would you use it? Pray, sir, tell me that.
This very night; for Love is like a child,That longs for every thing that he can come by.
By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.
But, hark thee; I will go to her alone:How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
It will be light, my lord, that you may bear itUnder a cloak that is of any length.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
Ay, my good lord.
Then let me see thy cloak:I'll get me one of such another length.
Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak? I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me. What letter is this same? What's here? 'To Silvia'! And here an engine fit for my proceeding. I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly, And slaves they are to me that send them flying: O, could their master come and go as lightly, Himself would lodge where senseless they are lying! My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them: While I, their king, that hither them importune, Do curse the grace that with such grace hath bless'd them, Because myself do want my servants' fortune: I curse myself, for they are sent by me, That they should harbour where their lord would be.' What's here? 'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.' 'Tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose. Why, Phaeton,—for thou art Merops' son,— Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car And with thy daring folly burn the world? Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee? Go, base intruder! Overweening slave! Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates, And think my patience, more than thy desert, Is privilege for thy departure hence: Thank me for this more than for all the favours Which all too much I have bestow'd on thee. But if thou linger in my territories Longer than swiftest expedition Will give thee time to leave our royal court, By heaven! My wrath shall far exceed the love I ever bore my daughter or thyself. Be gone! I will not hear thy vain excuse; But, as thou lovest thy life, make speed from hence.
And why not death rather than living torment? To die is to be banish'd from myself; And Silvia is myself: banish'd from her Is self from self: a deadly banishment! What light is light, if Silvia be not seen? What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by? Unless it be to think that she is by And feed upon the shadow of perfection Except I be by Silvia in the night, There is no music in the nightingale; Unless I look on Silvia in the day, There is no day for me to look upon; She is my essence, and I leave to be, If I be not by her fair influence Foster'd, illumined, cherish'd, kept alive. I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom: Tarry I here, I but attend on death: But, fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.
Soho, soho!
What seest thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Him we go to find: there's not a hair on's headbut 'tis a Valentine.
Valentine?
No.
Who then? His spirit?
Neither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What then?
Nothing.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
Who wouldst thou strike?
Nothing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Villain, forbear.
Why, sir, I'll strike nothing: I pray you,—
Sirrah, I say, forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.
My ears are stopt and cannot hear good news,So much of bad already hath possess'd them.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,For they are harsh, untuneable and bad.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is Silvia dead?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Silvia.Hath she forsworn me?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.What is your news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
That thou art banished—O, that's the news!—From hence, from Silvia and from me thy friend.
O, I have fed upon this woe already,And now excess of it will make me surfeit.Doth Silvia know that I am banished?
Ay, ay; and she hath offer'd to the doom— Which, unreversed, stands in effectual force— A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears: Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd; With them, upon her knees, her humble self; Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them As if but now they waxed pale for woe: But neither bended knees, pure hands held up, Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears, Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire; But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die. Besides, her intercession chafed him so, When she for thy repeal was suppliant, That to close prison he commanded her, With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more; unless the next word that thou speak'st Have some malignant power upon my life: If so, I pray thee, breathe it in mine ear, As ending anthem of my endless dolour.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Cease to lament for that thou canst not help, And study help for that which thou lament'st. Time is the nurse and breeder of all good. Here if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love; Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life. Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that And manage it against despairing thoughts. Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence; Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love. The time now serves not to expostulate: Come, I'll convey thee through the city-gate; And, ere I part with thee, confer at large Of all that may concern thy love-affairs. As thou lovest Silvia, though not for thyself, Regard thy danger, and along with me!
I pray thee, Lance, an if thou seest my boy,Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate.
Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.
O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
I am but a fool, look you; and yet I have the wit to think my master is a kind of a knave: but that's all one, if he be but one knave. He lives not now that knows me to be in love; yet I am in love; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me; nor who 'tis I love; and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman, I will not tell myself; and yet 'tis a milkmaid; yet 'tis not a maid, for she hath had gossips; yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's maid, and serves for wages. She hath more qualities than a water-spaniel; which is much in a bare Christian.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Here is the cate-log of her condition. 'Imprimis: She can fetch and carry.' Why, a horse can do no more: nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a jade. 'Item: She can milk;' look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands.
How now, Signior Lance! What news with yourmastership?
With my master's ship? Why, it is at sea.
Well, your old vice still; mistake the word. Whatnews, then, in your paper?
The blackest news that ever thou heardest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, man, how black?
Why, as black as ink.
Let me read them.
Fie on thee, jolt-head! Thou canst not read.
Thou liest; I can.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will try thee. Tell me this: who begot thee?
Marry, the son of my grandfather.
O illiterate loiterer! It was the son of thy grandmother: this proves that thou canst not read.
Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.
There; and St. Nicholas be thy speed!
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Reads] 'Imprimis: She can milk.'
Ay, that she can.
'Item: She brews good ale.'
And thereof comes the proverb: 'Blessing of yourheart, you brew good ale.'
'Item: She can sew.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That's as much as to say, 'Can she so?'
'Item: She can knit.'
What need a man care for a stock with a wench, whenshe can knit him a stock?
'Item: She can wash and scour.'
A special virtue: for then she need not be washedand scoured.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Item: She can spin.'
Then may I set the world on wheels, when she canspin for her living.
'Item: She hath many nameless virtues.'
That's as much as to say, bastard virtues; that,indeed, know not their fathers and therefore have no names.
'Here follow her vices.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Close at the heels of her virtues.
'Item: She is not to be kissed fasting in respectof her breath.'
Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast. Read on.
'Item: She hath a sweet mouth.'
That makes amends for her sour breath.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Item: She doth talk in her sleep.'
It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
'Item: She is slow in words.'
O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow in words is a woman's only virtue: I pray thee, out with't, and place it for her chief virtue.
'Item: She is proud.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Out with that too; it was Eve's legacy, and cannotbe ta'en from her.
'Item: She hath no teeth.'
I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
'Item: She is curst.'
Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Item: She will often praise her liquor.'
If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not, Iwill; for good things should be praised.
'Item: She is too liberal.'
Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow of; of her purse she shall not, for that I'll keep shut: now, of another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faultsthan hairs, and more wealth than faults.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Stop there; I'll have her: she was mine, and not mine, twice or thrice in that last article. Rehearse that once more.
'Item: She hath more hair than wit,'—
More hair than wit? It may be; I'll prove it. The cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt; the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the greater hides the less. What's next?
'And more faults than hairs,'—
That's monstrous: O, that that were out!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'And more wealth than faults.'
Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well,I'll have her; and if it be a match, as nothing isimpossible,—
What then?
Why, then will I tell thee—that thy master staysfor thee at the North-gate.
For me?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For thee! Ay, who art thou? He hath stayed for abetter man than thee.
And must I go to him?
Thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so longthat going will scarce serve the turn.
Why didst not tell me sooner? Pox of your love letters!
Now will he be swinged for reading my letter; anunmannerly slave, that will thrust himself intosecrets! I'll after, to rejoice in the boy's correction.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Turio, fear not but that she will love you,Now Valentine is banish'd from her sight.
Since his exile she hath despised me most,Forsworn my company and rail'd at me,That I am desperate of obtaining her.
This weak impress of love is as a figure Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat Dissolves to water and doth lose his form. A little time will melt her frozen thoughts And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countrymanAccording to our proclamation gone?
Gone, my good lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My daughter takes his going grievously.
A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
So I believe; but Turio thinks not so. Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee— For thou hast shown some sign of good desert— Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer than I prove loyal to your graceLet me not live to look upon your grace.
Thou know'st how willingly I would effectThe match between Sir Turio and my daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I do, my lord.
And also, I think, thou art not ignorantHow she opposes her against my will.
She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
Ay, and perversely she persevers so. What might we do to make the girl forget The love of Valentine and love Sir Turio?
The best way is to slander Valentine With falsehood, cowardice and poor descent, Three things that women highly hold in hate.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.
Ay, if his enemy deliver it:Therefore it must with circumstance be spokenBy one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,Especially against his very friend.
Where your good word cannot advantage him, Your slander never can endamage him; Therefore the office is indifferent, Being entreated to it by your friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have prevail'd, my lord; if I can do it By ought that I can speak in his dispraise, She shall not long continue love to him. But say this weed her love from Valentine, It follows not that she will love Sir Turio.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him, Lest it should ravel and be good to none, You must provide to bottom it on me; Which must be done by praising me as much As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind, Because we know, on Valentine's report, You are already Love's firm votary And cannot soon revolt and change your mind. Upon this warrant shall you have access Where you with Silvia may confer at large; For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy, And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you; Where you may temper her by your persuasion To hate young Valentine and love my friend.
As much as I can do, I will effect: But you, Sir Turio, are not sharp enough; You must lay lime to tangle her desires By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
Ay,Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say that upon the altar of her beauty You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart: Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears Moist it again, and frame some feeling line That may discover such integrity: For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews, Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones, Make tigers tame and huge leviathans Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands. After your dire-lamenting elegies, Visit by night your lady's chamber-window With some sweet concert; to their instruments Tune a deploring dump: the night's dead silence Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance. This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
And thy advice this night I'll put in practise. Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver, Let us into the city presently To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music. I have a sonnet that will serve the turn To give the onset to thy good advice.
About it, gentlemen!
We'll wait upon your grace till after supper,And afterward determine our proceedings.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even now about it! I will pardon you.
Fellows, stand fast; I see a passenger.
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about ye:If not: we'll make you sit and rifle you.
Sir, we are undone; these are the villainsThat all the travellers do fear so much.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My friends,—
That's not so, sir: we are your enemies.
Peace! We'll hear him.
Ay, by my beard, will we, for he's a proper man.
Then know that I have little wealth to lose: A man I am cross'd with adversity; My riches are these poor habiliments, Of which if you should here disfurnish me, You take the sum and substance that I have.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whither travel you?
To Verona.
Whence came you?
From Milan.
Have you long sojourned there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Some sixteen months, and longer might have stay'd,If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
What, were you banish'd thence?
I was.
For what offence?
For that which now torments me to rehearse: I kill'd a man, whose death I much repent; But yet I slew him manfully in fight, Without false vantage or base treachery.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, ne'er repent it, if it were done so.But were you banish'd for so small a fault?
I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
Have you the tongues?
My youthful travel therein made me happy,Or else I often had been miserable.
By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,This fellow were a king for our wild faction!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll have him. Sirs, a word.
Master, be one of them; it's an honourable kind of thievery.
Peace, villain!
Tell us this: have you any thing to take to?
Nothing but my fortune.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen, Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth Thrust from the company of awful men: Myself was from Verona banished For practising to steal away a lady, An heir, and near allied unto the duke.
And I from Mantua, for a gentleman,Who, in my mood, I stabb'd unto the heart.
And I for such like petty crimes as these, But to the purpose—for we cite our faults, That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives; And partly, seeing you are beautified With goodly shape and by your own report A linguist and a man of such perfection As we do in our quality much want—
Indeed, because you are a banish'd man, Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you: Are you content to be our general? To make a virtue of necessity And live, as we do, in this wilderness?
What say'st thou? Wilt thou be of our consort? Say ay, and be the captain of us all: We'll do thee homage and be ruled by thee, Love thee as our commander and our king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou diest.
Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offer'd.
I take your offer and will live with you, Provided that you do no outrages On silly women or poor passengers.
No, we detest such vile base practises. Come, go with us, we'll bring thee to our crews, And show thee all the treasure we have got, Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
Already have I been false to Valentine And now I must be as unjust to Turio. Under the colour of commending him, I have access my own love to prefer: But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy, To be corrupted with my worthless gifts. When I protest true loyalty to her, She twits me with my falsehood to my friend; When to her beauty I commend my vows, She bids me think how I have been forsworn In breaking faith with Julia whom I loved: And notwithstanding all her sudden quips, The least whereof would quell a lover's hope, Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love, The more it grows and fawneth on her still. But here comes Turio: now must we to her window, And give some evening music to her ear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
Ay, gentle Turio: for you know that loveWill creep in service where it cannot go.
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.
Who? Silvia?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, Silvia; for your sake.
I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.
Now, my young guest, methinks you're allycholly: Ipray you, why is it?
Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.
Come, we'll have you merry: I'll bring you whereyou shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But shall I hear him speak?
Ay, that you shall.
That will be music.
Hark, hark!
Is he among these?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay: but, peace! Let's hear 'em.
[sings the song] Who is Silvia? What is she? That all our swains commend her? Holy, fair and wise is she; The heaven such grace did lend her, That she might admired be. Is she kind as she is fair? For beauty lives with kindness. Love doth to her eyes repair, To help him of his blindness, And, being help'd, inhabits there. Then to Silvia let us sing, That Silvia is excelling; She excels each mortal thing Upon the dull earth dwelling: To her let us garlands bring.
How now! Are you sadder than you were before? Howdo you, man? The music likes you not.
You mistake; the musician likes me not.
Why, my pretty youth?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He plays false, father.
How? Out of tune on the strings?
Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my veryheart-strings.
You have a quick ear.
Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I perceive you delight not in music.
Not a whit, when it jars so.
Hark, what fine change is in the music!
Ay, that change is the spite.
You would have them always play but one thing?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would always have one play but one thing.But, host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk onOften resort unto this gentlewoman?
I tell you what Lance, his man, told me: he lovedher out of all nick.
Where is Lance?
Gone to seek his dog; which tomorrow, by hismaster's command, he must carry for a present to his lady.
Peace! Stand aside: the company parts.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Turio, fear not you: I will so pleadThat you shall say my cunning drift excels.
Where meet we?
At Saint Gregory's well.
Farewell.
Madam, good even to your ladyship.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you for your music, gentlemen.Who is that that spake?
One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
Sir Proteus, as I take it.
Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
What's your will?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I may compass yours.
You have your wish; my will is even this: That presently you hie you home to bed. Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man! Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless, To be seduced by thy flattery, That hast deceived so many with thy vows? Return, return, and make thy love amends. For me, by this pale queen of night I swear, I am so far from granting thy request That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit, And by and by intend to chide myself Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady;But she is dead.
[Aside] 'Twere false, if I should speak it;For I am sure she is not buried.
Say that she be; yet Valentine thy friend Survives; to whom, thyself art witness, I am betroth'd : and art thou not ashamed To wrong him with thy importunacy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
And so suppose am I; for in his graveAssure thyself my love is buried.
Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence,Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
[Aside] He heard not that.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, if your heart be so obdurate, Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love, The picture that is hanging in your chamber; To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep: For since the substance of your perfect self Is else devoted, I am but a shadow; And to your shadow will I make true love.
[Aside] If 'twere a substance, you would, sure,deceive it,And make it but a shadow, as I am.
I am very loath to be your idol, sir; But since your falsehood shall become you well To worship shadows and adore false shapes, Send to me in the morning and I'll send it: And so, good rest.
As wretches have o'ernightThat wait for execution in the morn.
Host, will you go?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By my halidom, I was fast asleep.
Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?
Marry, at my house. Trust me, I think 'tis almostday.
Not so; but it hath been the longest nightThat e'er I watch'd and the most heaviest.
This is the hour that Madam Silvia Entreated me to call and know her mind: There's some great matter she'ld employ me in. Madam, madam!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who calls?
Your servant and your friend;One that attends your ladyship's command.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself: According to your ladyship's impose, I am thus early come to know what service It is your pleasure to command me in.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman— Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not— Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd: Thou art not ignorant what dear good will I bear unto the banish'd Valentine, Nor how my father would enforce me marry Vain Turio, whom my very soul abhors. Thyself hast loved; and I have heard thee say No grief did ever come so near thy heart As when thy lady and thy true love died, Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity. Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine, To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode; And, for the ways are dangerous to pass, I do desire thy worthy company, Upon whose faith and honour I repose. Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour, But think upon my grief, a lady's grief, And on the justice of my flying hence, To keep me from a most unholy match, Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues. I do desire thee, even from a heart As full of sorrows as the sea of sands, To bear me company and go with me: If not, to hide what I have said to thee, That I may venture to depart alone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, I pity much your grievances; Which since I know they virtuously are placed, I give consent to go along with you, Recking as little what betideth me As much I wish all good befortune you. When will you go?
This evening coming.
Where shall I meet you?
At Friar Patrick's cell,Where I intend holy confession.
I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
When a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you, it goes hard: one that I brought up of a puppy; one that I saved from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it. I have taught him, even as one would say precisely, 'thus I would teach a dog.' I was sent to deliver him as a present to Mistress Silvia from my master; and I came no sooner into the dining-chamber but he steps me to her trencher and steals her capon's leg: O, 'tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself in all companies! I would have, as one should say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I think verily he had been hanged for't; sure as I live, he had suffered for't; you shall judge. He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentlemanlike dogs under the duke's table: he had not been there—bless the mark!—a pissing while, but all the chamber smelt him. 'Out with the dog!' says one: 'What cur is that?' says another: 'Whip him out' says the third: 'Hang him up' says the duke. I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs: 'Friend,' quoth I, 'you mean to whip the dog?' 'Ay, marry, do I,' quoth he. 'You do him the more wrong,' quoth I; ''twas I did the thing you wot of.' He makes me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber. How many masters would do this for his servant? Nay, I'll be sworn, I have sat in the stocks for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had been executed; I have stood on the pillory for geese he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered for't. Thou thinkest not of this now. Nay, I remember the trick you served me when I took my leave of Madam Silvia: did not I bid thee still mark me and do as I do? When didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman's farthingale? Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee wellAnd will employ thee in some service presently.
In what you please: I'll do what I can.
I hope thou wilt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][to LANCE] How now, you whoreson peasant!Where have you been these two days loitering?
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
And what says she to my little jewel?
Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells youcurrish thanks is good enough for such a present.
But she received my dog?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, indeed, did she not: here have I brought himback again.
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by the hangman boys in the market-place: and then I offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift the greater.
Go get thee hence, and find my dog again, Or ne'er return again into my sight. Away, I say! Stay'st thou to vex me here?
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame! Sebastian, I have entertained thee, Partly that I have need of such a youth That can with some discretion do my business, For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout, But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior, Which, if my augury deceive me not, Witness good bringing up, fortune and truth: Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee. Go presently and take this ring with thee, Deliver it to Madam Silvia: She loved me well deliver'd it to me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.She is dead, belike?
Not so; I think she lives.
Alas!
Why dost thou cry 'alas'?
I cannot chooseBut pity her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
Because methinks that she loved you as well As you do love your lady Silvia: She dreams of him that has forgot her love; You dote on her that cares not for your love. 'Tis pity love should be so contrary; And thinking of it makes me cry 'alas!'
Well, give her that ring and therewithal This letter. That's her chamber. Tell my lady I claim the promise for her heavenly picture. Your message done, hie home unto my chamber, Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.
How many women would do such a message? Alas, poor Proteus! Thou hast entertain'd A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs. Alas, poor fool! Why do I pity him That with his very heart despiseth me? Because he loves her, he despiseth me; Because I love him I must pity him. This ring I gave him when he parted from me, To bind him to remember my good will; And now am I, unhappy messenger, To plead for that which I would not obtain, To carry that which I would have refused, To praise his faith which I would have dispraised. I am my master's true-confirmed love; But cannot be true servant to my master, Unless I prove false traitor to myself. Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my meanTo bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What would you with her, if that I be she?
If you be she, I do entreat your patienceTo hear me speak the message I am sent on.
From whom?
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
O, he sends you for a picture.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, madam.
Ursula, bring my picture here. Go give your master this: tell him from me, One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget, Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Madam, please you peruse this letter.— Pardon me, madam; I have unadvised Deliver'd you a paper that I should not: This is the letter to your ladyship.
I pray thee, let me look on that again.
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There, hold! I will not look upon your master's lines: I know they are stuff'd with protestations And full of new-found oaths; which he will break As easily as I do tear his paper.
Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
The more shame for him that he sends it me; For I have heard him say a thousand times His Julia gave it him at his departure. Though his false finger have profaned the ring, Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
She thanks you.
What say'st thou?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I thank you, madam, that you tender her.Poor gentlewoman! My master wrongs her much.
Dost thou know her?
Almost as well as I do know myself:To think upon her woes I do protestThat I have wept a hundred several times.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
I think she doth; and that's her cause of sorrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is she not passing fair?
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is: When she did think my master loved her well, She, in my judgment, was as fair as you: But since she did neglect her looking-glass And threw her sun-expelling mask away, The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face, That now she is become as black as I.
How tall was she?
About my stature; for at Pentecost, When all our pageants of delight were play'd, Our youth got me to play the woman's part, And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown, Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments, As if the garment had been made for me: Therefore I know she is about my height. And at that time I made her weep agood, For I did play a lamentable part: Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight; Which I so lively acted with my tears That my poor mistress, moved therewithal, Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead If I in thought felt not her very sorrow!
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth. Alas, poor lady, desolate and left! I weep myself to think upon thy words. Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her. Farewell.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her. A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful I hope my master's suit will be but cold, Since she respects my mistress' love so much. Alas, how love can trifle with itself! Here is her picture: let me see; I think, If I had such a tire, this face of mine Were full as lovely as is this of hers: And yet the painter flatter'd her a little, Unless I flatter with myself too much. Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow: If that be all the difference in his love, I'll get me such a colour'd periwig. Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine: Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high. What should it be that he respects in her But I can make respective in myself, If this fond Love were not a blinded god? Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up, For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form, Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, loved and adored! And, were there sense in his idolatry, My substance should be statue in thy stead. I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake, That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow, I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes To make my master out of love with thee!
The sun begins to gild the western sky; And now it is about the very hour That Silvia, at Friar Patrick's cell, should meet me. She will not fail, for lovers break not hours, Unless it be to come before their time; So much they spur their expedition. See where she comes.
Lady, a happy evening!
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,Out at the postern by the abbey-wall:I fear I am attended by some spies.
Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off;If we recover that, we are sure enough.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit?
O, sir, I find her milder than she was;And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
What, that my leg is too long?
No; that it is too little.
I'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] But love will not be spurr'd to whatit loathes.
What says she to my face?
She says it is a fair one.
Nay then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
But pearls are fair; and the old saying is,Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] 'Tis true; such pearls as put outladies' eyes;For I had rather wink than look on them.
How likes she my discourse?
Ill, when you talk of war.
But well, when I discourse of love and peace?
[Aside] But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What says she to my valour?
O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
[Aside] She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
What says she to my birth?
That you are well derived.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] True; from a gentleman to a fool.
Considers she my possessions?
O, ay; and pities them.
Wherefore?
[Aside] That such an ass should owe them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That they are out by lease.
Here comes the duke.
How now, Sir Proteus! How now, Turio!Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
Not I.
Nor I.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Saw you my daughter?
Neither.
Why then, She's fled unto that peasant Valentine; And Eglamour is in her company. 'Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both, As he in penance wander'd through the forest; Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she, But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it; Besides, she did intend confession At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not; These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence. Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse, But mount you presently and meet with me Upon the rising of the mountain-foot That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled: Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl, That flies her fortune when it follows her. I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
And I will follow, more for Silvia's loveThan hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And I will follow, more to cross that loveThan hate for Silvia that is gone for love.
Come, come,Be patient; we must bring you to our captain.
A thousand more mischances than this oneHave learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
Come, bring her away.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us, But Moyses and Valerius follow him. Go thou with her to the west end of the wood; There is our captain: we'll follow him that's fled; The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave:Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,And will not use a woman lawlessly.
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!
How use doth breed a habit in a man! This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods, I better brook than flourishing peopled towns: Here can I sit alone, unseen of any, And to the nightingale's complaining notes Tune my distresses and record my woes. O thou that dost inhabit in my breast, Leave not the mansion so long tenantless, Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall And leave no memory of what it was! Repair me with thy presence, Silvia; Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain! What halloing and what stir is this to-day? These are my mates, that make their wills their law, Have some unhappy passenger in chase. They love me well; yet I have much to do To keep them from uncivil outrages. Withdraw thee, Valentine: who's this comes here?
Madam, this service I have done for you, Though you respect not aught your servant doth, To hazard life and rescue you from him That would have forced your honour and your love; Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look; A smaller boon than this I cannot beg And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] How like a dream is this I see and hear!Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;But by my coming I have made you happy.
By thy approach thou makest me most unhappy.
[Aside] And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had I been seized by a hungry lion, I would have been a breakfast to the beast, Rather than have false Proteus rescue me. O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine, Whose life's as tender to me as my soul! And full as much, for more there cannot be, I do detest false perjured Proteus. Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
What dangerous action, stood it next to death, Would I not undergo for one calm look! O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approved, When women cannot love where they're beloved!
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved. Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love, For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths Descended into perjury, to love me. Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two; And that's far worse than none; better have none Than plural faith which is too much by one: Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
In loveWho respects friend?
All men but Proteus.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words Can no way change you to a milder form, I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end, And love you 'gainst the nature of love,—force ye.
O heaven!
I'll force thee yield to my desire.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,Thou friend of an ill fashion!
Valentine!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou common friend, that's without faith or love, For such is a friend now; treacherous man! Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove me. Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus, I am sorry I must never trust thee more, But count the world a stranger for thy sake. The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst, 'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
My shame and guilt confounds me. Forgive me, Valentine: if hearty sorrow Be a sufficient ransom for offence, I tender 't here; I do as truly suffer As e'er I did commit.
Then I am paid; And once again I do receive thee honest. Who by repentance is not satisfied Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased. By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeased: And, that my love may appear plain and free, All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
O me unhappy!
Look to the boy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, boy! Why, wag! How now! What's the matter?Look up; speak.
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ringto Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
Where is that ring, boy?
Here 'tis; this is it.
How! Let me see:Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook:This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
But how camest thou by this ring? At my departI gave this unto Julia.
And Julia herself did give it me;And Julia herself hath brought it hither.
How! Julia!
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths, And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart. How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root! O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush! Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me Such an immodest raiment, if shame live In a disguise of love: It is the lesser blot, modesty finds, Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Than men their minds! 'Tis true. O heaven! Were man But constant, he were perfect. That one error Fills him with faults; makes him run through all the sins: Inconstancy falls off ere it begins. What is in Silvia's face, but I may spy More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
Come, come, a hand from either: Let me be blest to make this happy close; 'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish for ever.
And I mine.
A prize, a prize, a prize!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Forbear, forbear, I say! It is my lord the duke.Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,Banished Valentine.
Sir Valentine!
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
Turio, give back, or else embrace thy death; Come not within the measure of my wrath; Do not name Silvia thine; if once again, Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands; Take but possession of her with a touch: I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I; I hold him but a fool that will endanger His body for a girl that loves him not: I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The more degenerate and base art thou, To make such means for her as thou hast done And leave her on such slight conditions. Now, by the honour of my ancestry, I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine, And think thee worthy of an empress' love: Know then, I here forget all former griefs, Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again, Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit, To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine, Thou art a gentleman and well derived; Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
I thank your grace; the gift hath made me happy. I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake, To grant one boom that I shall ask of you.
I grant it, for thine own, whate'er it be.
These banish'd men that I have kept withal Are men endued with worthy qualities: Forgive them what they have committed here And let them be recall'd from their exile: They are reformed, civil, full of good And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
Thou hast prevail'd; I pardon them and thee: Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts. Come, let us go: we will include all jars With triumphs, mirth and rare solemnity.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And, as we walk along, I dare be boldWith our discourse to make your grace to smile.What think you of this page, my lord?
I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
What mean you by that saying?
Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along, That you will wonder what hath fortuned. Come, Proteus; 'tis your penance but to hear The story of your loves discovered: That done, our day of marriage shall be yours; One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as I have said, great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.
I think, this coming summer, the King of Siciliameans to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will bejustified in our loves; for indeed—
Beseech you—
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge: we cannot with such magnificence—in so rare—I know not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs meand as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia. They were trained together in their childhoods; and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their society, their encounters, though not personal, have been royally attorneyed with interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies; that they have seemed to be together, though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed winds. The heavens continue their loves!
I think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came into my note.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to see him a man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would they else be content to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they shoulddesire to live.
If the king had no son, they would desire to liveon crutches till he had one.
Nine changes of the watery star hath been The shepherd's note since we have left our throne Without a burthen: time as long again Would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks; And yet we should, for perpetuity, Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher, Yet standing in rich place, I multiply With one 'We thank you' many thousands more That go before it.
Stay your thanks a while;And pay them when you part.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, that's to-morrow. I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance Or breed upon our absence; that may blow No sneaking winds at home, to make us say 'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd To tire your royalty.
We are tougher, brother,Than you can put us to't.
No longer stay.
One seven-night longer.
Very sooth, to-morrow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We'll part the time between's then; and in thatI'll no gainsaying.
Press me not, beseech you, so. There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world, So soon as yours could win me: so it should now, Were there necessity in your request, although 'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder Were in your love a whip to me; my stay To you a charge and trouble: to save both, Farewell, our brother.
Tongue-tied, our queen?speak you.
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir, Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him, He's beat from his best ward.
Well said, Hermione.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong: But let him say so then, and let him go; But let him swear so, and he shall not stay, We'll thwack him hence with distaffs. Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia You take my lord, I'll give him my commission To let him there a month behind the gest Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes, I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?
No, madam.
Nay, but you will?
I may not, verily.
Verily! You put me off with limber vows; but I, Though you would seek t'unsphere the stars with oaths, Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily, You shall not go. A lady's 'Verily' is As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet? Force me to keep you as a prisoner, Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you? My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,' One of them you shall be.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your guest, then, madam:To be your prisoner should import offending;Which is for me less easy to commitThan you to punish.
Not your gaoler, then,But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question youOf my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:You were pretty lordings then?
We were, fair queen,Two lads that thought there was no more behindBut such a day to-morrow as to-day,And to be boy eternal.
Was not my lordThe verier wag o' the two?
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun, And bleat the one at the other: what we changed Was innocence for innocence; we knew not The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd That any did. Had we pursued that life, And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd Hereditary ours.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By this we gatherYou have tripp'd since.
O my most sacred lady! Temptations have since then been born to's; for In those unfledged days was my wife a girl; Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes Of my young play-fellow.
Grace to boot! Of this make no conclusion, lest you say Your queen and I are devils: yet go on; The offences we have made you do we'll answer, If you first sinn'd with us and that with us You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not With any but with us.
Is he won yet?
He'll stay my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At my request he would not.Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokestTo better purpose.
Never?
Never, but once.
What! have I twice said well? when was't before? I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that. Our praises are our wages: you may ride's With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal: My last good deed was to entreat his stay: What was my first? it has an elder sister, Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace! But once before I spoke to the purpose: when? Nay, let me have't; I long.
Why, that was when Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death, Ere I could make thee open thy white hand And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter 'I am yours for ever.'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis grace indeed.Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;The other for some while a friend.
[Aside] Too hot, too hot! To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods. I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances; But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment May a free face put on, derive a liberty From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom, And well become the agent; 't may, I grant; But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers, As now they are, and making practised smiles, As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere The mort o' the deer; O, that is entertainment My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius, Art thou my boy?
Ay, my good lord.
I' fecks! Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast smutch'd thy nose? They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain, We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain: And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf Are all call'd neat.— Still virginalling Upon his palm!— How now, you wanton calf! Art thou my calf?
Yes, if you will, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have, To be full like me: yet they say we are Almost as like as eggs; women say so, That will say anything but were they false As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page, Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain! Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?—may't be?— Affection! thy intention stabs the centre: Thou dost make possible things not so held, Communicatest with dreams;—how can this be?— With what's unreal thou coactive art, And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost, And that beyond commission, and I find it, And that to the infection of my brains And hardening of my brows.
What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled.
How, my lord!What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?
You look as if you held a brow of much distractionAre you moved, my lord?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, in good earnest. How sometimes nature will betray its folly, Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd, In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled, Lest it should bite its master, and so prove, As ornaments oft do, too dangerous: How like, methought, I then was to this kernel, This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend, Will you take eggs for money?
No, my lord, I'll fight.
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,Are you so fond of your young prince as weDo seem to be of ours?
If at home, sir, He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter, Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy, My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all: He makes a July's day short as December, And with his varying childness cures in me Thoughts that would thick my blood.
So stands this squire Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord, And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione, How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome; Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap: Next to thyself and my young rover, he's Apparent to my heart.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you would seek us,We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found, Be you beneath the sky. [Aside] I am angling now, Though you perceive me not how I give line. Go to, go to! How she holds up the neb, the bill to him! And arms her with the boldness of a wife To her allowing husband! [Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants] Gone already! Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and ears a fork'd one! Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play. There have been, Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now; And many a man there is, even at this present, Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm, That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd, As mine, against their will. Should all despair That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none; It is a bawdy planet, that will strike Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it, From east, west, north and south: be it concluded, No barricado for a belly; know't; It will let in and out the enemy With bag and baggage: many thousand on's Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!
I am like you, they say.
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?
Ay, my good lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man. [Exit MAMILLIUS] Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:When you cast out, it still came home.
Didst note it?
He would not stay at your petitions: madeHis business more material.
Didst perceive it? [Aside] They're here with me already, whispering, rounding'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,That he did stay?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]At the good queen's entreaty.
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken By any understanding pate but thine? For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in More than the common blocks: not noted, is't, But of the finer natures? by some severals Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
Business, my lord! I think most understandBohemia stays here longer.
Ha!
Stays here longer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, but why?
To satisfy your highness and the entreatiesOf our most gracious mistress.
Satisfy! The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy! Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo, With all the nearest things to my heart, as well My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been Deceived in thy integrity, deceived In that which seems so.
Be it forbid, my lord!
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or, If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward, Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining From course required; or else thou must be counted A servant grafted in my serious trust And therein negligent; or else a fool That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn, And takest it all for jest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My gracious lord, I may be negligent, foolish and fearful; In every one of these no man is free, But that his negligence, his folly, fear, Among the infinite doings of the world, Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord, If ever I were wilful-negligent, It was my folly; if industriously I play'd the fool, it was my negligence, Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful To do a thing, where I the issue doubted, Where of the execution did cry out Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord, Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty Is never free of. But, beseech your grace, Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass By its own visage: if I then deny it, 'Tis none of mine.
Ha' not you seen, Camillo— But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass Is thicker than a cuckold's horn, —or heard,— For to a vision so apparent rumour Cannot be mute,—or thought,—for cogitation Resides not in that man that does not think,— My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess, Or else be impudently negative, To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name As rank as any flax-wench that puts to Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
I would not be a stander-by to hear My sovereign mistress clouded so, without My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart, You never spoke what did become you less Than this; which to reiterate were sin As deep as that, though true.
Is whispering nothing? Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses? Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career Of laughing with a sigh? —a note infallible Of breaking honesty—horsing foot on foot? Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift? Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only, That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing? Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing; The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing; My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings, If this be nothing.
Good my lord, be curedOf this diseased opinion, and betimes;For 'tis most dangerous.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Say it be, 'tis true.
No, no, my lord.
It is; you lie, you lie: I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee, Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave, Or else a hovering temporizer, that Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver Infected as her life, she would not live The running of one glass.
Who does infect her?
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I Had servants true about me, that bare eyes To see alike mine honour as their profits, Their own particular thrifts, they would do that Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou, His cupbearer,—whom I from meaner form Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven, How I am galled,— mightst bespice a cup, To give mine enemy a lasting wink; Which draught to me were cordial.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, my lord, I could do this, and that with no rash potion, But with a lingering dram that should not work Maliciously like poison: but I cannot Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress, So sovereignly being honourable. I have loved thee,—
Make that thy question, and go rot! Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled, To appoint myself in this vexation, sully The purity and whiteness of my sheets, Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps, Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son, Who I do think is mine and love as mine, Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this? Could man so blench?
I must believe you, sir: I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't; Provided that, when he's removed, your highness Will take again your queen as yours at first, Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms Known and allied to yours.
Thou dost advise meEven so as I mine own course have set down:I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
My lord, Go then; and with a countenance as clear As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia And with your queen. I am his cupbearer: If from me he have wholesome beverage, Account me not your servant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This is all:Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;Do't not, thou split'st thine own.
I'll do't, my lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
O miserable lady! But, for me, What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't Is the obedience to a master, one Who in rebellion with himself will have All that are his so too. To do this deed, Promotion follows. If I could find example Of thousands that had struck anointed kings And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, Let villany itself forswear't. I must Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now! Here comes Bohemia.
This is strange: methinksMy favour here begins to warp. Not speak?Good day, Camillo.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hail, most royal sir!
What is the news i' the court?
None rare, my lord.
The king hath on him such a countenance As he had lost some province and a region Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him With customary compliment; when he, Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and So leaves me to consider what is breeding That changeth thus his manners.
I dare not know, my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not? Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts; For, to yourself, what you do know, you must. And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo, Your changed complexions are to me a mirror Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be A party in this alteration, finding Myself thus alter'd with 't.
There is a sicknessWhich puts some of us in distemper, butI cannot name the disease; and it is caughtOf you that yet are well.
How! caught of me! Make me not sighted like the basilisk: I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,— As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns Our gentry than our parents' noble names, In whose success we are gentle,— I beseech you, If you know aught which does behove my knowledge Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not In ignorant concealment.
I may not answer.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well! I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo, I conjure thee, by all the parts of man Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare What incidency thou dost guess of harm Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near; Which way to be prevented, if to be; If not, how best to bear it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sir, I will tell you;Since I am charged in honour and by himThat I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,Which must be even as swiftly follow'd asI mean to utter it, or both yourself and meCry lost, and so good night!
On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murder you.
By whom, Camillo?
By the king.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For what?
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,As he had seen't or been an instrumentTo vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queenForbiddenly.
O, then my best blood turn To an infected jelly and my name Be yoked with his that did betray the Best! Turn then my freshest reputation to A savour that may strike the dullest nostril Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd, Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection That e'er was heard or read!
Swear his thought over By each particular star in heaven and By all their influences, you may as well Forbid the sea for to obey the moon As or by oath remove or counsel shake The fabric of his folly, whose foundation Is piled upon his faith and will continue The standing of his body.
How should this grow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born. If therefore you dare trust my honesty, That lies enclosed in this trunk which you Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night! Your followers I will whisper to the business, And will by twos and threes at several posterns Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put My fortunes to your service, which are here By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain; For, by the honour of my parents, I Have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove, I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon His execution sworn.
I do believe thee: I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand: Be pilot to me and thy places shall Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and My people did expect my hence departure Two days ago. This jealousy Is for a precious creature: as she's rare, Must it be great, and as his person's mighty, Must it be violent, and as he does conceive He is dishonour'd by a man which ever Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me: Good expedition be my friend, and comfort The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo; I will respect thee as a father if Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.
It is in mine authority to commandThe keys of all the posterns: please your highnessTo take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,'Tis past enduring.
Come, my gracious lord,Shall I be your playfellow?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I'll none of you.
Why, my sweet lord?
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as ifI were a baby still. I love you better.
And why so, my lord?
Not for becauseYour brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,Become some women best, so that there be notToo much hair there, but in a semicircleOr a half-moon made with a pen.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who taught you this?
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray nowWhat colour are your eyebrows?
Blue, my lord.
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's noseThat has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
Hark ye;The queen your mother rounds apace: we shallPresent our services to a fine new princeOne of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,If we would have you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She is spread of lateInto a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, nowI am for you again: pray you, sit by us,And tell 's a tale.
Merry or sad shall't be?
As merry as you will.
A sad tale's best for winter: I have oneOf sprites and goblins.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let's have that, good sir.Come on, sit down: come on, and do your bestTo fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.
There was a man—
Nay, come, sit down; then on.
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;Yond crickets shall not hear it.
Come on, then,And give't me in mine ear.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; neverSaw I men scour so on their way: I eyed themEven to their ships.
How blest am I In my just censure, in my true opinion! Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed In being so blest! There may be in the cup A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart, And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge Is not infected: but if one present The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides, With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider. Camillo was his help in this, his pander: There is a plot against my life, my crown; All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him: He has discover'd my design, and I Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick For them to play at will. How came the posterns So easily open?
By his great authority;Which often hath no less prevail'd than soOn your command.
I know't too well.Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:Though he does bear some signs of me, yet youHave too much blood in him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What is this? sport?
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;Away with him! and let her sport herselfWith that she's big with; for 'tis PolixenesHas made thee swell thus.
But I'ld say he had not,And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,Howe'er you lean to the nayward.
You, my lords, Look on her, mark her well; be but about To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and The justice of your hearts will thereto add 'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:' Praise her but for this her without-door form, Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands That calumny doth use—O, I am out— That mercy does, for calumny will sear Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's, When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known, From him that has most cause to grieve it should be, She's an adulteress.
Should a villain say so,The most replenish'd villain in the world,He were as much more villain: you, my lord,Do but mistake.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You have mistook, my lady, Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing! Which I'll not call a creature of thy place, Lest barbarism, making me the precedent, Should a like language use to all degrees And mannerly distinguishment leave out Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said She's an adulteress; I have said with whom: More, she's a traitor and Camillo is A federary with her, and one that knows What she should shame to know herself But with her most vile principal, that she's A bed-swerver, even as bad as those That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy To this their late escape.
No, by my life. Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you, When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord, You scarce can right me throughly then to say You did mistake.
No; if I mistakeIn those foundations which I build upon,The centre is not big enough to bearA school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!He who shall speak for her is afar off guiltyBut that he speaks.
There's some ill planet reigns: I must be patient till the heavens look With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords, I am not prone to weeping, as our sex Commonly are; the want of which vain dew Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have That honourable grief lodged here which burns Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords, With thoughts so qualified as your charities Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so The king's will be perform'd!
Shall I be heard?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness, My women may be with me; for you see My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools; There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress Has deserved prison, then abound in tears As I come out: this action I now go on Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord: I never wish'd to see you sorry; now I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justiceProve violence; in the which three great ones suffer,Yourself, your queen, your son.
For her, my lord,I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotlessI' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,In this which you accuse her.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it prove She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her; Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her; For every inch of woman in the world, Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my lord,—
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves: You are abused and by some putter-on That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain, I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd, I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven The second and the third, nine, and some five; If this prove true, they'll pay for't: by mine honour, I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see, To bring false generations: they are co-heirs; And I had rather glib myself than they Should not produce fair issue.
Cease; no more.You smell this business with a sense as coldAs is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel'tAs you feel doing thus; and see withalThe instruments that feel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If it be so,We need no grave to bury honesty:There's not a grain of it the face to sweetenOf the whole dungy earth.
What! lack I credit?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,Upon this ground; and more it would content meTo have her honour true than your suspicion,Be blamed for't how you might.
Why, what need we Commune with you of this, but rather follow Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves We need no more of your advice: the matter, The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all Properly ours.
And I wish, my liege,You had only in your silent judgment tried it,Without more overture.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How could that be? Either thou art most ignorant by age, Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight, Added to their familiarity, Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture, That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation But only seeing, all other circumstances Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding: Yet, for a greater confirmation, For in an act of this importance 'twere Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple, Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had, Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Well done, my lord.
Though I am satisfied and need no more Than what I know, yet shall the oracle Give rest to the minds of others, such as he Whose ignorant credulity will not Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good From our free person she should be confined, Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence Be left her to perform. Come, follow us; We are to speak in public; for this business Will raise us all.
[Aside] To laughter, as I take it,If the good truth were known.
The keeper of the prison, call to him;let him have knowledge who I am. [Exit Gentleman] Good lady,No court in Europe is too good for thee;What dost thou then in prison? [Re-enter Gentleman, with the Gaoler] Now, good sir,You know me, do you not?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]For a worthy ladyAnd one whom much I honour.
Pray you then,Conduct me to the queen.
I may not, madam:To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado,To lock up honesty and honour fromThe access of gentle visitors!Is't lawful, pray you,To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
So please you, madam,To put apart these your attendants, IShall bring Emilia forth.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I pray now, call her.Withdraw yourselves.
And, madam,I must be present at your conference.
Well, be't so, prithee. [Exit Gaoler] Here's such ado to make no stain a stainAs passes colouring. [Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA] Dear gentlewoman,How fares our gracious lady?
As well as one so great and so forlornMay hold together: on her frights and griefs,Which never tender lady hath born greater,She is something before her time deliver'd.
A boy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A daughter, and a goodly babe,Lusty and like to live: the queen receivesMuch comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,I am innocent as you.'
I dare be sworn These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king, beshrew them! He must be told on't, and he shall: the office Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me: If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister And never to my red-look'd anger be The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia, Commend my best obedience to the queen: If she dares trust me with her little babe, I'll show't the king and undertake to be Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know How he may soften at the sight o' the child: The silence often of pure innocence Persuades when speaking fails.
Most worthy madam, Your honour and your goodness is so evident That your free undertaking cannot miss A thriving issue: there is no lady living So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship To visit the next room, I'll presently Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer; Who but to-day hammer'd of this design, But durst not tempt a minister of honour, Lest she should be denied.
Tell her, Emilia.I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from'tAs boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubtedI shall do good.
Now be you blest for it!I'll to the queen: please you,come something nearer.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,I know not what I shall incur to pass it,Having no warrant.
You need not fear it, sir:This child was prisoner to the womb and isBy law and process of great nature thenceFreed and enfranchised, not a party toThe anger of the king nor guilty of,If any be, the trespass of the queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If The cause were not in being,—part o' the cause, She the adulteress; for the harlot king Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she I can hook to me: say that she were gone, Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest Might come to me again. Who's there?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord?
How does the boy?
He took good rest to-night;'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
To see his nobleness! Conceiving the dishonour of his mother, He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply, Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself, Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep, And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go, See how he fares. [Exit Servant] Fie, fie! no thought of him: The thought of my revenges that way Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty, And in his parties, his alliance; let him be Until a time may serve: for present vengeance, Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow: They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor Shall she within my power.
You must not enter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,More free than he is jealous.
That's enough.
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commandedNone should come at him.
Not so hot, good sir: I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you, That creep like shadows by him and do sigh At each his needless heavings, such as you Nourish the cause of his awaking: I Do come with words as medicinal as true, Honest as either, to purge him of that humour That presses him from sleep.
What noise there, ho?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No noise, my lord; but needful conferenceAbout some gossips for your highness.
How!Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,I charged thee that she should not come about me:I knew she would.
I told her so, my lord,On your displeasure's peril and on mine,She should not visit you.
What, canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can: in this,Unless he take the course that you have done,Commit me for committing honour, trust it,He shall not rule me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]La you now, you hear:When she will take the rein I let her run;But she'll not stumble.
Good my liege, I come; And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess Myself your loyal servant, your physician, Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare Less appear so in comforting your evils, Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come From your good queen.
Good queen!
Good queen, my lord,Good queen; I say good queen;And would by combat make her good, so were IA man, the worst about you.
Force her hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him that makes but trifles of his eyesFirst hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.
Out!A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:A most intelligencing bawd!
Not so:I am as ignorant in that as youIn so entitling me, and no less honestThan you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,As this world goes, to pass for honest.
Traitors!Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroostedBy thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.
For everUnvenerable be thy hands, if thouTakest up the princess by that forced basenessWhich he has put upon't!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He dreads his wife.
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubtYou'ld call your children yours.
A nest of traitors!
I am none, by this good light.
Nor I, nor any But one that's here, and that's himself, for he The sacred honour of himself, his queen's, His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander, Whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will not— For, as the case now stands, it is a curse He cannot be compell'd to't—once remove The root of his opinion, which is rotten As ever oak or stone was sound.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A callat Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband And now baits me! This brat is none of mine; It is the issue of Polixenes: Hence with it, and together with the dam Commit them to the fire!
It is yours; And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge, So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords, Although the print be little, the whole matter And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip, The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley, The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, His smiles, The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger: And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it So like to him that got it, if thou hast The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does, Her children not her husband's!
A gross hagAnd, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,That wilt not stay her tongue.
Hang all the husbandsThat cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourselfHardly one subject.
Once more, take her hence.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A most unworthy and unnatural lordCan do no more.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
I care not: It is an heretic that makes the fire, Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant; But this most cruel usage of your queen, Not able to produce more accusation Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours Of tyranny and will ignoble make you, Yea, scandalous to the world.
On your allegiance,Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,Where were her life? she durst not call me so,If she did know me one. Away with her!
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone. Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours: Jove send her A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands? You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies, Will never do him good, not one of you. So, so: farewell; we are gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this. My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence And see it instantly consumed with fire; Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight: Within this hour bring me word 'tis done, And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life, With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so; The bastard brains with these my proper hands Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire; For thou set'st on thy wife.
I did not, sir:These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,Can clear me in't.
We can: my royal liege,He is not guilty of her coming hither.
You're liars all.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit: We have always truly served you, and beseech you So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg, As recompense of our dear services Past and to come, that you do change this purpose, Which being so horrible, so bloody, must Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am a feather for each wind that blows: Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel And call me father? better burn it now Than curse it then. But be it; let it live. It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither; You that have been so tenderly officious With Lady Margery, your midwife there, To save this bastard's life,—for 'tis a bastard, So sure as this beard's grey, —what will you adventure To save this brat's life?
Any thing, my lord,That my ability may undergoAnd nobleness impose: at least thus much:I'll pawn the little blood which I have leftTo save the innocent: any thing possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this swordThou wilt perform my bidding.
I will, my lord.
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail Of any point in't shall not only be Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife, Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee, As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry This female bastard hence and that thou bear it To some remote and desert place quite out Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it, Without more mercy, to its own protection And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune It came to us, I do in justice charge thee, On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture, That thou commend it strangely to some place Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I swear to do this, though a present death Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe: Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say Casting their savageness aside have done Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous In more than this deed does require! And blessing Against this cruelty fight on thy side, Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
No, I'll not rearAnother's issue.
Please your highness, postsFrom those you sent to the oracle are comeAn hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,Hasting to the court.
So please you, sir, their speedHath been beyond account.
Twenty-three days They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells The great Apollo suddenly will have The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords; Summon a session, that we may arraign Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath Been publicly accused, so shall she have A just and open trial. While she lives My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me, And think upon my bidding.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassingThe common praise it bears.
I shall report,For most it caught me, the celestial habits,Methinks I so should term them, and the reverenceOf the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!How ceremonious, solemn and unearthlyIt was i' the offering!
But of all, the burstAnd the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my senseThat I was nothing.
If the event o' the journeyProve as successful to the queen,—O be't so!—As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,The time is worth the use on't.
Great ApolloTurn all to the best! These proclamations,So forcing faults upon Hermione,I little like.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The violent carriage of it Will clear or end the business: when the oracle, Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up, Shall the contents discover, something rare Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses! And gracious be the issue!
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce, Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried The daughter of a king, our wife, and one Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd Of being tyrannous, since we so openly Proceed in justice, which shall have due course, Even to the guilt or the purgation. Produce the prisoner.
It is his highness' pleasure that the queenAppear in person here in court. Silence!
Read the indictment.
[Reads] Hermione, queen to the worthy Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open, thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for their better safety, to fly away by night.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Since what I am to say must be but that Which contradicts my accusation and The testimony on my part no other But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it, Be so received. But thus: if powers divine Behold our human actions, as they do, I doubt not then but innocence shall make False accusation blush and tyranny Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know, Who least will seem to do so, my past life Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true, As I am now unhappy; which is more Than history can pattern, though devised And play'd to take spectators. For behold me A fellow of the royal bed (which owe A moiety of the throne), a great king's daughter, The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour, 'Tis a derivative from me to mine, And only that I stand for. I appeal To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes Came to your court, how I was in your grace, How merited to be so; since he came, With what encounter so uncurrent I Have strain'd to appear thus: i f one jot beyond The bound of honour, or in act or will That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin Cry fie upon my grave!
I ne'er heard yetThat any of these bolder vices wantedLess impudence to gainsay what they didThan to perform it first.
That's true enough;Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
You will not own it.
More than mistress of Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not At all acknowledge. For Polixenes, With whom I am accused, I do confess I loved him as in honour he required, With such a kind of love as might become A lady like me, with a love even such, So and no other, as yourself commanded: Which not to have done I think had been in me Both disobedience and ingratitude To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke, Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy, I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd For me to try how: all I know of it Is that Camillo was an honest man; And why he left your court, the gods themselves, Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You knew of his departure, as you knowWhat you have underta'en to do in's absence.
Sir,You speak a language that I understand not:My life stands in the level of your dreams,Which I'll lay down.
Your actions are my dreams; You had a bastard by Polixenes, And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,— Those of your fact are so—so past all truth: Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself, No father owning it,— which is, indeed, More criminal in thee than it,—so thou Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage Look for no less than death.
Sir, spare your threats: The bug which you would fright me with I seek. To me can life be no commodity: The crown and comfort of my life, your favour, I do give lost; for I do feel it gone, But know not how it went. My second joy And first-fruits of my body, from his presence I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast, The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth, Haled out to murder: myself on every post Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs To women of all fashion; l astly, hurried Here to this place, i' the open air, before I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege, Tell me what blessings I have here alive, That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed. But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life, I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour, Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else But what your jealousies awake, I tell you 'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all, I do refer me to the oracle: Apollo be my judge!
This your requestIs altogether just: therefore bring forth,And in Apollos name, his oracle.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The Emperor of Russia was my father:O that he were alive, and here beholdingHis daughter's trial! that he did but seeThe flatness of my misery, yet with eyesOf pity, not revenge!
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice, That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd Of great Apollo's priest; and that, since then, You have not dared to break the holy seal Nor read the secrets in't.
All this we swear.
Break up the seals and read.
[Reads] Hermione is chaste;Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontesa jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;and the king shall live without an heir, if thatwhich is lost be not found.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now blessed be the great Apollo!
Praised!
Hast thou read truth?
Ay, my lord; even soAs it is here set down.
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord the king, the king!
What is the business?
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!The prince your son, with mere conceit and fearOf the queen's speed, is gone.
How! gone!
Is dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselvesDo strike at my injustice. [HERMIONE swoons] How now there!
This news is mortal to the queen: look downAnd see what death is doing.
Take her hence: Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover: I have too much believed mine own suspicion: Beseech you, tenderly apply to her Some remedies for life. [Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE] Apollo, pardon My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle! I'll reconcile me to Polixenes, New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo, Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy; For, being transported by my jealousies To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose Camillo for the minister to poison My friend Polixenes: which had been done, But that the good mind of Camillo tardied My swift command, though I with death and with Reward did threaten and encourage him, Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here, Which you knew great, and to the hazard Of all encertainties himself commended, No richer than his honour: how he glisters Thorough my rust! and how his pity Does my deeds make the blacker!
Woe the while!O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,Break too.
What fit is this, good lady?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me? What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling? In leads or oils? what old or newer torture Must I receive, whose every word deserves To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny Together working with thy jealousies, Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle For girls of nine, O, think what they have done And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it. That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing; That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much, Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour, To have him kill a king: poor trespasses, More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter To be or none or little; though a devil Would have shed water out of fire ere done't: Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts, Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart That could conceive a gross and foolish sire Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no, Laid to thy answer: but the last,—O lords, When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen, The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead, and vengeance for't Not dropp'd down yet.
The higher powers forbid!
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant! Do not repent these things, for they are heavier Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee To nothing but despair. A thousand knees Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting, Upon a barren mountain and still winter In storm perpetual, could not move the gods To look that way thou wert.
Go on, go onThou canst not speak too much; I have deservedAll tongues to talk their bitterest.
Say no more:Howe'er the business goes, you have made faultI' the boldness of your speech.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am sorry for't: All faults I make, when I shall come to know them, I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help Should be past grief: do not receive affliction At my petition; I beseech you, rather Let me be punish'd, that have minded you Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman: The love I bore your queen—lo, fool again!— I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children; I'll not remember you of my own lord, Who is lost too: take your patience to you, And I'll say nothing.
Thou didst speak but well When most the truth; which I receive much better Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me To the dead bodies of my queen and son: One grave shall be for both: upon them shall The causes of their death appear, unto Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there Shall be my recreation: so long as nature Will bear up with this exercise, so long I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me Unto these sorrows.
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd uponThe deserts of Bohemia?
Ay, my lord: and fear We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly And threaten present blusters. In my conscience, The heavens with that we have in hand are angry And frown upon's.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;Look to thy bark: I'll not be long beforeI call upon thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Make your best haste, and go notToo far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;Besides, this place is famous for the creaturesOf prey that keep upon't.
Go thou away:I'll follow instantly.
I am glad at heartTo be so rid o' the business.
Come, poor babe: I have heard, but not believed, the spirits o' the dead May walk again: i f such thing be, thy mother Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream So like a waking. To me comes a creature, Sometimes her head on one side, some another; I never saw a vessel of like sorrow, So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes, Like very sanctity, she did approach My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me, And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus, Since fate, against thy better disposition, Hath made thy person for the thrower-out Of my poor babe, according to thine oath, Places remote enough are in Bohemia, There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe Is counted lost for ever, Perdita, I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks She melted into air. Affrighted much, I did in time collect myself and thought This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys: Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously, I will be squared by this. I do believe Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that Apollo would, this being indeed the issue Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid, Either for life or death, upon the earth Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well! There lie, and there thy character: there these; Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch, That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot, But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I To be by oath enjoin'd to this. Farewell! The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have A lullaby too rough: I never saw The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour! Well may I get aboard! This is the chase: I am gone for ever.
I would there were no age between sixteen and three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest; for there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting— Hark you now! Would any but these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape: though I am not bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. This has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hilloa, loa!
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talkon when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. Whatailest thou, man?
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now thesky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrusta bodkin's point.
Why, boy, how is it?
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up the shore! but that's not the point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls! sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a cork into a hogshead. And then for the land-service, to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea or weather.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw thesesights: the men are not yet cold under water, northe bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at itnow.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
I would you had been by the ship side, to havehelped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here, boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy; open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be rich by the fairies. This is some changeling: open't. What's within, boy?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You're a made old man: if the sins of your youthare forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: upwith't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requiresnothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, goodboy, the next way home.
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go seeif the bear be gone from the gentleman and how muchhe hath eaten: they are never curst but when theyare hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll buryit.
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by thatwhich is left of him what he is, fetch me to thesight of him.
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
SCENE I:
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error, Now take upon me, in the name of Time, To use my wings. Impute it not a crime To me or my swift passage, that I slide O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried Of that wide gap, since it is in my power To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass The same I am, ere ancient'st order was Or what is now received: I witness to The times that brought them in; so shall I do To the freshest things now reigning and make stale The glistering of this present, as my tale Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing, I turn my glass and give my scene such growing As you had slept between: Leontes leaving, The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving That he shuts up himself, imagine me, Gentle spectators, that I now may be In fair Bohemia, and remember well, I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel I now name to you; and with speed so pace To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace Equal with wondering: what of her ensues I list not prophecy; but let Time's news Be known when 'tis brought forth. A shepherd's daughter, And what to her adheres, which follows after, Is the argument of Time. Of this allow, If ever you have spent time worse ere now; If never, yet that Time himself doth say He wishes earnestly you never may.
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death togrant this.
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though I have for the most part been aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to think so, which is another spur to my departure.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute them thyself or take away with thee the very services thou hast done; which if I have not enough considered, as too much I cannot, to be more thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance of that penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king, my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are even now to be afresh lamented. Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. Whathis happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but Ihave missingly noted, he is of late much retiredfrom court and is less frequent to his princelyexercises than formerly he hath appeared.
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some care; so far that I have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness; from whom I have this intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath adaughter of most rare note: the report of her isextended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not appearing what we are, have some question with the shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither. Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
When daffodils begin to peer, With heigh! the doxy over the dale, Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year; For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale. The white sheet bleaching on the hedge, With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing! Doth set my pugging tooth on edge; For a quart of ale is a dish for a king. The lark, that tirra-lyra chants, With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay, Are summer songs for me and my aunts, While we lie tumbling in the hay. I have served Prince Florizel and in my time wore three-pile; but now I am out of service: But shall I go mourn for that, my dear? The pale moon shines by night: And when I wander here and there, I then do most go right. If tinkers may have leave to live, And bear the sow-skin budget, Then my account I well may, give, And in the stocks avouch it. My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it. A prize! a prize!
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every todyields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundredshorn. what comes the wool to?
[Aside] If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,—what will this sister of mine do with rice? But my father hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden pies; mace; dates?—none, that's out of my note; nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of raisins o' the sun.
O that ever I was born!
I' the name of me—
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; andthen, death, death!
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to layon thee, rather than have these off.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me morethan the stripes I have received, which are mightyones and millions.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to agreat matter.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparelta'en from me, and these detestable things put uponme.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments hehas left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
Alas, poor soul!
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, myshoulder-blade is out.
How now! canst stand?
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Picking his pocket] Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha' done mea charitable office.
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I havea kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, orany thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;that kills my heart.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about withtroll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of theprince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of hisvirtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of thecourt.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whippedout of the court: they cherish it to make it staythere; and yet it will no more but abide.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he hath been since an ape-bearer; then a process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's wife within a mile where my land and living lies; and, having flown over many knavish professions, he settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he hauntswakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue thatput me into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you hadbut looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I amfalse of heart that way; and that he knew, I warranthim.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand andwalk: I will even take my leave of you, and pacesoftly towards my kinsman's.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for oursheep-shearing.
Prosper you, sweet sir! [Exit Clown] Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if Imake not this cheat bring out another and theshearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my nameput in the book of virtue! [Sings] Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,And merrily hent the stile-a:A merry heart goes all the day,Your sad tires in a mile-a.
These your unusual weeds to each part of you Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing Is as a meeting of the petty gods, And you the queen on't.
Sir, my gracious lord, To chide at your extremes it not becomes me: O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self, The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid, Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts In every mess have folly and the feeders Digest it with a custom, I should blush To see you so attired, sworn, I think, To show myself a glass.
I bless the timeWhen my good falcon made her flight acrossThy father's ground.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Now Jove afford you cause! To me the difference forges dread; your greatness Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble To think your father, by some accident, Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates! How would he look, to see his work so noble Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold The sternness of his presence?
Apprehend Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves, Humbling their deities to love, have taken The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god, Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain, As I seem now. Their transformations Were never for a piece of beauty rarer, Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts Burn hotter than my faith.
O, but, sir, Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king: One of these two must be necessities, Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose, Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita, With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair, Or not my father's. For I cannot be Mine own, nor any thing to any, if I be not thine. To this I am most constant, Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle; Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing That you behold the while. Your guests are coming: Lift up your countenance, as it were the day Of celebration of that nuptial which We two have sworn shall come.
O lady Fortune,Stand you auspicious!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]See, your guests approach:Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,And let's be red with mirth.
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon This day she was both pantler, butler, cook, Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all; Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here, At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle; On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire With labour and the thing she took to quench it, She would to each one sip. You are retired, As if you were a feasted one and not The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is A way to make us better friends, more known. Come, quench your blushes and present yourself That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on, And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing, As your good flock shall prosper.
[To POLIXENES] Sir, welcome:It is my father's will I should take on meThe hostess-ship o' the day. [To CAMILLO] You're welcome, sir.Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,For you there's rosemary and rue; these keepSeeming and savour all the winter long:Grace and remembrance be to you both,And welcome to our shearing!
Shepherdess,A fair one are you—well you fit our agesWith flowers of winter.
Sir, the year growing ancient, Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o' the season Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors, Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not To get slips of them.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wherefore, gentle maiden,Do you neglect them?
For I have heard it saidThere is an art which in their piedness sharesWith great creating nature.
Say there be; Yet nature is made better by no mean But nature makes that mean: so, over that art Which you say adds to nature, is an art That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry A gentler scion to the wildest stock, And make conceive a bark of baser kind By bud of nobler race: this is an art Which does mend nature, change it rather, but The art itself is nature.
So it is.
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,And do not call them bastards.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I'll not put The dibble in earth to set one slip of them; No more than were I painted I would wish This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you; Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram; The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun And with him rises weeping: these are flowers Of middle summer, and I think they are given To men of middle age. You're very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,And only live by gazing.
Out, alas! You'd be so lean, that blasts of January Would blow you through and through. Now, my fair'st friend, I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might Become your time of day; and yours, and yours, That wear upon your virgin branches yet Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina, For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall From Dis's waggon! daffodils, That come before the swallow dares, and take The winds of March with beauty; violets dim, But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses That die unmarried, ere they can behold Bright Phoebus in his strength—a malady Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds, The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack, To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend, To strew him o'er and o'er!
What, like a corse?
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on; Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried, But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers: Methinks I play as I have seen them do In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine Does change my disposition.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What you do Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet. I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing, I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms, Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs, To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do Nothing but that; move still, still so, And own no other function: each your doing, So singular in each particular, Crowns what you are doing in the present deed, That all your acts are queens.
O Doricles,Your praises are too large: but that your youth,And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,You woo'd me the false way.
I think you haveAs little skill to fear as I have purposeTo put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,That never mean to part.
I'll swear for 'em.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that everRan on the green-sward: nothing she does or seemsBut smacks of something greater than herself,Too noble for this place.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He tells her somethingThat makes her blood look out: good sooth, she isThe queen of curds and cream.
Come on, strike up!
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,To mend her kissing with!
Now, in good time!
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.Come, strike up!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is thisWhich dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself To have a worthy feeding: but I have it Upon his own report and I believe it; He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter: I think so too; for never gazed the moon Upon the water as he'll stand and read As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain. I think there is not half a kiss to choose Who loves another best.
She dances featly.
So she does any thing; though I report it,That should be silent: if young DoriclesDo light upon her, she shall bring him thatWhich he not dreams of.
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you would never dance again after a tabour and pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's ears grew to his tunes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He could never come better; he shall come in. Ilove a ballad but even too well, if it be dolefulmatter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thingindeed and sung lamentably.
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
This is a brave fellow.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceitedfellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow; points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though they come to him by the gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
You have of these pedlars, that have more in themthan you'ld think, sister.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
Lawn as white as driven snow; Cyprus black as e'er was crow; Gloves as sweet as damask roses; Masks for faces and for noses; Bugle bracelet, necklace amber, Perfume for a lady's chamber; Golden quoifs and stomachers, For my lads to give their dears: Pins and poking-sticks of steel, What maids lack from head to heel: Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy; Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst takeno money of me; but being enthralled as I am, itwill also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
I was promised them against the feast; but they comenot too late now.
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he haspaid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
Is there no manners left among maids? will they wear their plackets where they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour your tongues, and not a word more.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-laceand a pair of sweet gloves.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the wayand lost all my money?
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;therefore it behoves men to be wary.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What hast here? ballads?
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'life, for then we are sure they are true.
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer'swife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at aburthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads andtoads carbonadoed.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a month old.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Here's the midwife's name to't, one MistressTale-porter, and five or six honest wives that werepresent. Why should I carry lies abroad?
Pray you now, buy it.
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moeballads; we'll buy the other things anon.
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April, forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Is it true too, think you?
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more thanmy pack will hold.
Lay it by too: another.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Let's have some merry ones.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Why, this is a passing merry one and goes tothe tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there'sscarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis inrequest, I can tell you.
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thoushalt hear; 'tis in three parts.
We had the tune on't a month ago.
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis myoccupation; have at it with you.
Get you hence, for I must goWhere it fits not you to know.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whither?
O, whither?
Whither?
It becomes thy oath full well,Thou to me thy secrets tell.
Me too, let me go thither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Or thou goest to the orange or mill.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Neither.
What, neither?
Neither.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast sworn my love to be.
Thou hast sworn it more to me:Then whither goest? say, whither?
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
And you shall pay well for 'em. [Follows singing] Will you buy any tape, Or lace for your cape, My dainty duck, my dear-a? Any silk, any thread, Any toys for your head, Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a? Come to the pedlar; Money's a medler. That doth utter all men's ware-a.
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not in't; but they themselves are o' the mind, if it be not too rough for some that know little but bowling, it will please plentifully.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too muchhomely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's seethese four threes of herdsmen.
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hathdanced before the king; and not the worst of thethree but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
Leave your prating: since these good men arepleased, let them come in; but quickly now.
Why, they stay at door, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter. [To CAMILLO] Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.He's simple and tells much. [To FLORIZEL] How now, fair shepherd! Your heart is full of something that does take Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young And handed love as you do, I was wont To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it To her acceptance; you have let him go And nothing marted with him. If your lass Interpretation should abuse and call this Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited For a reply, at least if you make a care Of happy holding her.
Old sir, I know She prizes not such trifles as these are: The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd Up in my heart; which I have given already, But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem, Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand, As soft as dove's down and as white as it, Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted By the northern blasts twice o'er.
What follows this?How prettily the young swain seems to washThe hand was fair before! I have put you out:But to your protestation; let me hearWhat you profess.
Do, and be witness to 't.
And this my neighbour too?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]And he, and more Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all: That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch, Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge More than was ever man's, I would not prize them Without her love; for her employ them all; Commend them and condemn them to her service Or to their own perdition.
Fairly offer'd.
This shows a sound affection.
But, my daughter,Say you the like to him?
I cannot speakSo well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut outThe purity of his.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Take hands, a bargain!And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:I give my daughter to him, and will makeHer portion equal his.
O, that must be I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead, I shall have more than you can dream of yet; Enough then for your wonder. But, come on, Contract us 'fore these witnesses.
Come, your hand;And, daughter, yours.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;Have you a father?
I have: but what of him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Knows he of this?
He neither does nor shall.
Methinks a father Is at the nuptial of his son a guest That best becomes the table. Pray you once more, Is not your father grown incapable Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear? Know man from man? dispute his own estate? Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing But what he did being childish?
No, good sir;He has his health and ampler strength indeedThan most have of his age.
By my white beard, You offer him, if this be so, a wrong Something unfilial: reason my son Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason The father, all whose joy is nothing else But fair posterity, should hold some counsel In such a business.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I yield all this;But for some other reasons, my grave sir,Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaintMy father of this business.
Let him know't.
He shall not.
Prithee, let him.
No, he must not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieveAt knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not.Mark our contract.
Mark your divorce, young sir, [Discovering himself] Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir, That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor, I am sorry that by hanging thee I can But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know The royal fool thou copest with,—
O, my heart!
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy, If I may ever know thou dost but sigh That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession; Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin, Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words: Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time, Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.— Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too, That makes himself, but for our honour therein, Unworthy thee,— if ever henceforth thou These rural latches to his entrance open, Or hoop his body more with thy embraces, I will devise a death as cruel for thee As thou art tender to't.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Even here undone! I was not much afeard; for once or twice I was about to speak and tell him plainly, The selfsame sun that shines upon his court Hides not his visage from our cottage but Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone? I told you what would come of this: beseech you, Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,— Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther, But milk my ewes and weep.
Why, how now, father!Speak ere thou diest.
I cannot speak, nor think Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir! You have undone a man of fourscore three, That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea, To die upon the bed my father died, To lie close by his honest bones: but now Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch, That knew'st this was the prince, and wouldst adventure To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone! If I might die within this hour, I have lived To die when I desire.
Why look you so upon me? I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd, But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am; More straining on for plucking back, not following My leash unwillingly.
Gracious my lord, You know your father's temper: at this time He will allow no speech, which I do guess You do not purpose to him; and as hardly Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear: Then, till the fury of his highness settle, Come not before him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I not purpose it.I think, Camillo?
Even he, my lord.
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!How often said, my dignity would lastBut till 'twere known!
It cannot fail but by The violation of my faith; and then Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks: From my succession wipe me, father; I Am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am, and by my fancy: if my reasonWill thereto be obedient, I have reason;If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate, sir.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow; I needs must think it honesty. Camillo, Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you, As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend, When he shall miss me,—as, in faith, I mean not To see him any more,— cast your good counsels Upon his passion; let myself and fortune Tug for the time to come. This you may know And so deliver, I am put to sea With her whom here I cannot hold on shore; And most opportune to our need I have A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared For this design. What course I mean to hold Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor Concern me the reporting.
O my lord!I would your spirit were easier for advice,Or stronger for your need.
Hark, Perdita [Drawing her aside] I'll hear you by and by.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He's irremoveable, Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if His going I could frame to serve my turn, Save him from danger, do him love and honour, Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia And that unhappy king, my master, whom I so much thirst to see.
Now, good Camillo;I am so fraught with curious business thatI leave out ceremony.
Sir, I thinkYou have heard of my poor services, i' the loveThat I have borne your father?
Very noblyHave you deserved: it is my father's musicTo speak your deeds, not little of his careTo have them recompensed as thought on.
Well, my lord, If you may please to think I love the king And through him what is nearest to him, which is Your gracious self, embrace but my direction: If your more ponderous and settled project May suffer alteration, on mine honour, I'll point you where you shall have such receiving As shall become your highness; where you may Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see, There's no disjunction to be made, but by— As heavens forefend!—your ruin; marry her, And, with my best endeavours in your absence, Your discontenting father strive to qualify And bring him up to liking.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How, Camillo,May this, almost a miracle, be done?That I may call thee something more than manAnd after that trust to thee.
Have you thought onA place whereto you'll go?
Not any yet:But as the unthought-on accident is guiltyTo what we wildly do, so we professOurselves to be the slaves of chance and fliesOf every wind that blows.
Then list to me: This follows, if you will not change your purpose But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia, And there present yourself and your fair princess, For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes: She shall be habited as it becomes The partner of your bed. Methinks I see Leontes opening his free arms and weeping His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness, As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him 'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one He chides to hell and bids the other grow Faster than thought or time.
Worthy Camillo,What colour for my visitation shall IHold up before him?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Sent by the king your father To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir, The manner of your bearing towards him, with What you as from your father shall deliver, Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down: The which shall point you forth at every sitting What you must say; that he shall not perceive But that you have your father's bosom there And speak his very heart.
I am bound to you:There is some sap in this.
A cause more promising Than a wild dedication of yourselves To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain To miseries enough; no hope to help you, But as you shake off one to take another; Nothing so certain as your anchors, who Do their best office, if they can but stay you Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know Prosperity's the very bond of love, Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together Affliction alters.
One of these is true:I think affliction may subdue the cheek,But not take in the mind.
Yea, say you so?There shall not at your father's house theseseven yearsBe born another such.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My good Camillo,She is as forward of her breeding asShe is i' the rear our birth.
I cannot say 'tis pityShe lacks instructions, for she seems a mistressTo most that teach.
Your pardon, sir; for thisI'll blush you thanks.
My prettiest Perdita! But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo, Preserver of my father, now of me, The medicine of our house, how shall we do? We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son, Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
My lord, Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes Do all lie there: it shall be so my care To have you royally appointed as if The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir, That you may know you shall not want, one word.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who should buy first, as if my trinkets had been hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer: by which means I saw whose purse was best in picture; and what I saw, to my good use I remembered. My clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes till he had both tune and words; which so drew the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come in with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in the whole army.
Nay, but my letters, by this means being thereSo soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes—
Shall satisfy your father.
Happy be you!All that you speak shows fair.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who have we here? [Seeing AUTOLYCUS] We'll make an instrument of this, omitNothing may give us aid.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fearnot, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly, —thou must think there's a necessity in't,—and change garments with this gentleman: though the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am a poor fellow, sir. [Aside] I know ye well enough.
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is halfflayed already.
Are you in earnest, sir? [Aside] I smell the trick on't.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot withconscience take it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,—let my prophecy Come home to ye!— you must retire yourself Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face, Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken The truth of your own seeming; that you may— For I do fear eyes over—to shipboard Get undescried.
I see the play so liesThat I must bear a part.
No remedy.Have you done there?
Should I now meet my father,He would not call me son.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, you shall have no hat. [Giving it to PERDITA] Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
Adieu, sir.
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!Pray you, a word.
[Aside] What I do next, shall be to tell the king Of this escape and whither they are bound; Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail To force him after: in whose company I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight I have a woman's longing.
Fortune speed us!Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The swifter speed the better.
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do this year connive at us, and we may do any thing extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of iniquity, stealing away from his father with his clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my profession.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:every lane's end, every shop, church, session,hanging, yields a careful man work.
See, see; what a man you are now!There is no other way but to tell the kingshe's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, but hear me.
Go to, then.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the king; and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show those things you found about her, those secret things, all but what she has with her: this being done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make me the king's brother-in-law.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off youcould have been to him and then your blood had beenthe dearer by I know how much an ounce.
[SEQ_SPLITTER][Aside] Very wisely, puppies!
Well, let us to the king: there is that in thisfardel will make him scratch his beard.
[Aside] I know not what impediment this complaintmay be to the flight of my master.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
[Aside] Though I am not naturally honest, I am sosometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement. [Taking off his false beard] How now, rustics! whither are you bound?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]To the palace, an it like your worship.
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the conditionof that fardel, the place of your dwelling, yournames, your ages, of what having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be known, discover.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have nolying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and theyoften give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them forit with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; thereforethey do not give us the lie.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if youhad not taken yourself with the manner.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings? hath not my gait in it the measure of the court? receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou, for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to open thy affair.
My business, sir, is to the king.
What advocate hast thou to him?
I know not, an't like you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say youhave none.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
How blessed are we that are not simple men!Yet nature might have made me as these are,Therefore I will not disdain.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
His garments are rich, but he wearsthem not handsomely.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the pickingon's teeth.
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?Wherefore that box?
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,which none must know but the king; and which heshall know within this hour, if I may come to thespeech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Why, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard anew ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,if thou beest capable of things serious, thou mustknow the king is full of grief.
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should havemarried a shepherd's daughter.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:the curses he shall have, the tortures he shallfeel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
Think you so, sir?
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall all come under the hangman: which though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an'tlike you, sir?
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then 'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recovered again with aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is, and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men, what you have to the king: being something gently considered, I'll bring you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man besides the king to effect your suits, here is man shall do it.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him, give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business forus, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as muchmore and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
After I have done what I promised?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, sir.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitifulone, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,he'll be made an example.
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be brought you.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;go on the right hand: I will but look upon thehedge and follow you.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means to do the prince my master good; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he think it fit to shore them again and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far officious; for I am proof against that title and what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present them: there may be matter in it.
Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make, Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down More penitence than done trespass: at the last, Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil; With them forgive yourself.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whilst I remember Her and her virtues, I cannot forget My blemishes in them, and so still think of The wrong I did myself; which was so much, That heirless it hath made my kingdom and Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man Bred his hopes out of.
True, too true, my lord:If, one by one, you wedded all the world,Or from the all that are took something good,To make a perfect woman, she you kill'dWould be unparallel'd.
I think so. Kill'd! She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now, Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good lady:You might have spoken a thousand things that wouldHave done the time more benefit and gracedYour kindness better.
You are one of thoseWould have him wed again.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If you would not so, You pity not the state, nor the remembrance Of his most sovereign name; consider little What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue, May drop upon his kingdom and devour Incertain lookers on. What were more holy Than to rejoice the former queen is well? What holier than, for royalty's repair, For present comfort and for future good, To bless the bed of majesty again With a sweet fellow to't?
There is none worthy, Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes; For has not the divine Apollo said, Is't not the tenor of his oracle, That King Leontes shall not have an heir Till his lost child be found? which that it shall, Is all as monstrous to our human reason As my Antigonus to break his grave And come again to me; who, on my life, Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel My lord should to the heavens be contrary, Oppose against their wills. [To LEONTES] Care not for issue; The crown will find an heir: great Alexander Left his to the worthiest; so his successor Was like to be the best.
Good Paulina, Who hast the memory of Hermione, I know, in honour, O, that ever I Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now, I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes, Have taken treasure from her lips—
And left themMore rich for what they yielded.
Thou speak'st truth. No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse, And better used, would make her sainted spirit Again possess her corpse, and on this stage, Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd, And begin, 'Why to me?'
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Had she such power,She had just cause.
She had; and would incense meTo murder her I married.
I should so. Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark Her eye, a nd tell me for what dull part in't You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd Should be 'Remember mine.'
Stars, stars,And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;I'll have no wife, Paulina.
Will you swearNever to marry but by my free leave?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
You tempt him over-much.
Unless another,As like Hermione as is her picture,Affront his eye.
Good madam,—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I have done. Yet, if my lord will marry,—if you will, sir, No remedy, but you will,—give me the office To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young As was your former; but she shall be such As, walk'd your first queen's ghost, it should take joy To see her in your arms.
My true Paulina,We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
ThatShall be when your first queen's again in breath;Never till then.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,Son of Polixenes, with his princess, sheThe fairest I have yet beheld, desires accessTo your high presence.
What with him? he comes notLike to his father's greatness: his approach,So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us'Tis not a visitation framed, but forcedBy need and accident. What train?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]But few,And those but mean.
His princess, say you, with him?
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,That e'er the sun shone bright on.
O Hermione, As every present time doth boast itself Above a better gone, so must thy grave Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself Have said and writ so, but your writing now Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been, Nor was not to be equall'd;'—thus your verse Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd, To say you have seen a better.
Pardon, madam: The one I have almost forgot,—your pardon,— The other, when she has obtain'd your eye, Will have your tongue too. This is a creature, Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal Of all professors else, make proselytes Of who she but bid follow.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How! not women?
Women will love her, that she is a womanMore worth than any man; men, that she isThe rarest of all women.
Go, Cleomenes;Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange He thus should steal upon us.
Had our prince,Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'dWell with this lord: there was not full a monthBetween their births.
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure, When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches Will bring me to consider that which may Unfurnish me of reason. They are come. Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince; For she did print your royal father off, Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one, Your father's image is so hit in you, His very air, that I should call you brother, As I did him, and speak of something wildly By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome! And your fair princess,—goddess!—O, alas! I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth Might thus have stood begetting wonder as You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost— All mine own folly—the society, Amity too, of your brave father, whom, Though bearing misery, I desire my life Once more to look on him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]By his command Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him Give you all greetings that a king, at friend, Can send his brother: and, but infirmity Which waits upon worn times hath something seized His wish'd ability, he had himself The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his Measured to look upon you; whom he loves— He bade me say so—more than all the sceptres And those that bear them living.
O my brother, Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir Afresh within me, and these thy offices, So rarely kind, are as interpreters Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither, As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage, At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune, To greet a man not worth her pains, much less The adventure of her person?
Good my lord,She came from Libya.
Where the warlike Smalus,That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence, A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd, To execute the charge my father gave me For visiting your highness: my best train I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd; Who for Bohemia bend, to signify Not only my success in Libya, sir, But my arrival and my wife's in safety Here where we are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The blessed gods Purge all infection from our air whilst you Do climate here! You have a holy father, A graceful gentleman; against whose person, So sacred as it is, I have done sin: For which the heavens, taking angry note, Have left me issueless; and your father's blest, As he from heaven merits it, with you Worthy his goodness. What might I have been, Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on, Such goodly things as you!
Most noble sir, That which I shall report will bear no credit, Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir, Bohemia greets you from himself by me; Desires you to attach his son, who has— His dignity and duty both cast off— Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with A shepherd's daughter.
Where's Bohemia? speak.
Here in your city; I now came from him: I speak amazedly; and it becomes My marvel and my message. To your court Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems, Of this fair couple, meets he on the way The father of this seeming lady and Her brother, having both their country quitted With this young prince.
Camillo has betray'd me;Whose honour and whose honesty till nowEndured all weathers.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Lay't so to his charge:He's with the king your father.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now Has these poor men in question. Never saw I Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth; Forswear themselves as often as they speak: Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them With divers deaths in death.
O my poor father!The heaven sets spies upon us, will not haveOur contract celebrated.
You are married?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:The odds for high and low's alike.
My lord,Is this the daughter of a king?
She is,When once she is my wife.
That 'once' I see by your good father's speedWill come on very slowly. I am sorry,Most sorry, you have broken from his likingWhere you were tied in duty, and as sorryYour choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,That you might well enjoy her.
Dear, look up: Though Fortune, visible an enemy, Should chase us with my father, power no jot Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir, Remember since you owed no more to time Than I do now: with thought of such affections, Step forth mine advocate; at your request My father will grant precious things as trifles.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,Which he counts but a trifle.
Sir, my liege,Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazesThan what you look on now.
I thought of her,Even in these looks I made. [To FLORIZEL] But your petitionIs yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,I am friend to them and you: upon which errandI now go toward him; therefore follow meAnd mark what way I make: come, good my lord.
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the oldshepherd deliver the manner how he found it:whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were allcommanded out of the chamber; only this methought Iheard the shepherd say, he found the child.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I would most gladly know the issue of it.
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with staring on one another, to tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be. [Enter another Gentleman] Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more. The news, Rogero?
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; theking's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder isbroken out within this hour that ballad-makerscannot be able to express it. [Enter a third gentleman] Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he candeliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this newswhich is called true is so like an old tale, thatthe verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the kingfound his heir?
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it, the letters of Antigonus found with it which they know to be his character, the majesty of the creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see the meeting of the two kings?
No.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner that it seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother, thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carriedhence the child?
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.
What became of his bark and his followers?
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and in the view of the shepherd: so that all the instruments which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of her husband, another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth, and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart that she might no more be in danger of losing.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The dignity of this act was worth the audience ofkings and princes; for by such was it acted.
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's death, with the manner how she came to't bravely confessed and lamented by the king, how attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,' I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.
Are they returned to the court?
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue, which is in the keeping of Paulina,— a piece many years in doing and now newly performed by that rare Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work, would beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of answer: thither with all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, eversince the death of Hermione, visited that removedhouse. Shall we thither and with our company piecethe rejoicing?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.Let's along.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter, so he then took her to be, who began to be much sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of weather continuing, this mystery remained undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I been the finder out of this secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits. [Enter Shepherd and Clown] Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons anddaughters will be all gentlemen born.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me this other day, because I was no gentleman born. See you these clothes? say you see them not and think me still no gentleman born: you were best say these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
And so have I, boy.
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and called me brother; and then the two kings called my father brother; and then the prince my brother and the princess my sister called my father father; and so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like tears that ever we shed.
We may live, son, to shed many more.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in sopreposterous estate as we are.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all thefaults I have committed to your worship and to giveme your good report to the prince my master.
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we aregentlemen.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Ay, an it like your good worship.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thouart as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]You may say it, but not swear it.
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors andfranklins say it, I'll swear it.
How if it be false, son?
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy good masters.
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfortThat I have had of thee!
What, sovereign sir, I did not well I meant well. All my services You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed, With your crown'd brother and these your contracted Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit, It is a surplus of your grace, which never My life may last to answer.
O Paulina, We honour you with trouble: but we came To see the statue of our queen: your gallery Have we pass'd through, not without much content In many singularities; but we saw not That which my daughter came to look upon, The statue of her mother.
As she lived peerless, So her dead likeness, I do well believe, Excels whatever yet you look'd upon Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare To see the life as lively mock'd as ever Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well. [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE standing like a statue] I like your silence, it the more shows offYour wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,Comes it not something near?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Her natural posture! Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she In thy not chiding, for she was as tender As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina, Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing So aged as this seems.
O, not by much.
So much the more our carver's excellence;Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes herAs she lived now.
As now she might have done, So much to my good comfort, as it is Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood, Even with such life of majesty, warm life, As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her! I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me For being more stone than it? O royal piece, There's magic in thy majesty, which has My evils conjured to remembrance and From thy admiring daughter took the spirits, Standing like stone with thee.
And give me leave,And do not say 'tis superstition, thatI kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,Dear queen, that ended when I but began,Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, patience!The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on, Which sixteen winters cannot blow away, So many summers dry; scarce any joy Did ever so long live; no sorrow But kill'd itself much sooner.
Dear my brother,Let him that was the cause of this have powerTo take off so much grief from you as heWill piece up in himself.
Indeed, my lord,If I had thought the sight of my poor imageWould thus have wrought you,—for the stone is mine—I'ld not have show'd it.
Do not draw the curtain.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancyMay think anon it moves.
Let be, let be.Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already—What was he that did make it? See, my lord,Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veinsDid verily bear blood?
Masterly done:The very life seems warm upon her lip.
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,As we are mock'd with art.
I'll draw the curtain:My lord's almost so far transported thatHe'll think anon it lives.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O sweet Paulina,Make me to think so twenty years together!No settled senses of the world can matchThe pleasure of that madness. Let't alone.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: butI could afflict you farther.
Do, Paulina;For this affliction has a taste as sweetAs any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,There is an air comes from her: what fine chiselCould ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,For I will kiss her.
Good my lord, forbear:The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your ownWith oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
No, not these twenty years.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So long could IStand by, a looker on.
Either forbear, Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you For more amazement. If you can behold it, I'll make the statue move indeed, descend And take you by the hand; but then you'll think— Which I protest against— I am assisted By wicked powers.
What you can make her do,I am content to look on: what to speak,I am content to hear; for 'tis as easyTo make her speak as move.
It is requiredYou do awake your faith. Then all stand still;On: those that think it is unlawful businessI am about, let them depart.
Proceed:No foot shall stir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Music, awake her; strike! [Music] 'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach; Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come, I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away, Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs: [HERMIONE comes down] Start not; her actions shall be holy as You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her Until you see her die again; for then You kill her double. Nay, present your hand: When she was young you woo'd her; now in age Is she become the suitor?
O, she's warm! If this be magic, let it be an artLawful as eating.
She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck:If she pertain to life let her speak too.
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,Or how stolen from the dead.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That she is living, Were it but told you, should be hooted at Like an old tale: but it appears she lives, Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while. Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady; Our Perdita is found.
You gods, look down And from your sacred vials pour your graces Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own. Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I, Knowing by Paulina that the oracle Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved Myself to see the issue.
There's time enough for that; Lest they desire upon this push to trouble Your joys with like relation. Go together, You precious winners all; your exultation Partake to every one. I, an old turtle, Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there My mate, that's never to be found again, Lament till I am lost.
O, peace, Paulina! Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent, As I by thine a wife: this is a match, And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine; But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her, As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far— For him, I partly know his mind— to find thee An honourable husband. Come, Camillo, And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty Is richly noted and here justified By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place. What! look upon my brother: both your pardons, That e'er I put between your holy looks My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law, And son unto the king, who, heavens directing, Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina, Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely Each one demand an answer to his part Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.
Good day, sir.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am glad you're well.
I have not seen you long: how goes the world?
It wears, sir, as it grows.
Ay, that's well known: But what particular rarity? what strange, Which manifold record not matches? See, Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.
I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, 'tis a worthy lord.
Nay, that's most fix'd.
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,To an untirable and continuate goodness:He passes.
I have a jewel here—
O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]If he will touch the estimate: but, for that—
[Reciting to himself] 'When we for recompense have praised the vile, It stains the glory in that happy verse Which aptly sings the good.'
'Tis a good form.
And rich: here is a water, look ye.
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedicationTo the great lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]A thing slipp'd idly from me. Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes From whence 'tis nourish'd: the fire i' the flint Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame Provokes itself and like the current flies Each bound it chafes. What have you there?
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.Let's see your piece.
'Tis a good piece.
So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Indifferent.
Admirable: how this grace Speaks his own standing! what a mental power This eye shoots forth! how big imagination Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture One might interpret.
It is a pretty mocking of the life.Here is a touch; is't good?
I will say of it,It tutors nature: artificial strifeLives in these touches, livelier than life.
How this lord is follow'd!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The senators of Athens: happy man!
Look, more!
You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors. I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man, Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug With amplest entertainment: my free drift Halts not particularly, but moves itself In a wide sea of wax: no levell'd malice Infects one comma in the course I hold; But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on, Leaving no tract behind.
How shall I understand you?
I will unbolt to you. You see how all conditions, how all minds, As well of glib and slippery creatures as Of grave and austere quality, tender down Their services to Lord Timon: his large fortune Upon his good and gracious nature hanging Subdues and properties to his love and tendance All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer To Apemantus, that few things loves better Than to abhor himself: even he drops down The knee before him, and returns in peace Most rich in Timon's nod.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I saw them speak together.
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures, That labour on the bosom of this sphere To propagate their states: amongst them all, Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd, One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame, Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her; Whose present grace to present slaves and servants Translates his rivals.
'Tis conceived to scope. This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks, With one man beckon'd from the rest below, Bowing his head against the sleepy mount To climb his happiness, would be well express'd In our condition.
Nay, sir, but hear me on. All those which were his fellows but of late, Some better than his value, on the moment Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance, Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear, Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him Drink the free air.
Ay, marry, what of these?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]When Fortune in her shift and change of mood Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down, Not one accompanying his declining foot.
'Tis common: A thousand moral paintings I can show That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen The foot above the head.
Imprison'd is he, say you?
Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt, His means most short, his creditors most strait: Your honourable letter he desires To those have shut him up; which failing, Periods his comfort.
Noble Ventidius! Well; I am not of that feather to shake off My friend when he must need me. I do know him A gentleman that well deserves a help: Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt, and free him.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Your lordship ever binds him.
Commend me to him: I will send his ransom; And being enfranchised, bid him come to me. 'Tis not enough to help the feeble up, But to support him after. Fare you well.
All happiness to your honour!
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
Freely, good father.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
I have so: what of him?
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!
Here, at your lordship's service.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature, By night frequents my house. I am a man That from my first have been inclined to thrift; And my estate deserves an heir more raised Than one which holds a trencher.
Well; what further?
One only daughter have I, no kin else, On whom I may confer what I have got: The maid is fair, o' the youngest for a bride, And I have bred her at my dearest cost In qualities of the best. This man of thineAttempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,Join with me to forbid him her resort;Myself have spoke in vain.
The man is honest.
Therefore he will be, Timon:His honesty rewards him in itself;It must not bear my daughter.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Does she love him?
She is young and apt:Our own precedent passions do instruct usWhat levity's in youth.
[To LUCILIUS] Love you the maid?
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
If in her marriage my consent be missing, I call the gods to witness, I will choose Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world, And dispossess her all.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How shall she be endow'd,if she be mated with an equal husband?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long: To build his fortune I will strain a little, For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter: What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise, And make him weigh with her.
Most noble lord,Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.
My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Humbly I thank your lordship: never mayThe state or fortune fall into my keeping,Which is not owed to you!
Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!
I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
A piece of painting, which I do beseechYour lordship to accept.
Painting is welcome. The painting is almost the natural man; or since dishonour traffics with man's nature, He is but outside: these pencill'd figures are Even such as they give out. I like your work; And you shall find I like it: wait attendance Till you hear further from me.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The gods preserve ye!
Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewelHath suffer'd under praise.
What, my lord! dispraise?
A more satiety of commendations.If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,It would unclew me quite.
My lord, 'tis rated As those which sell would give: but you well know, Things of like value differing in the owners Are prized by their masters: believe't, dear lord, You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Well mock'd.
No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,Which all men speak with him.
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
We'll bear, with your lordship.
He'll spare none.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Then I repent not.
You know me, Apemantus?
Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Whither art going?
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
That's a deed thou'lt die for.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]The best, for the innocence.
Wrought he not well that painted it?
He wrought better that made the painter; and yethe's but a filthy piece of work.
You're a dog.
Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
No; I eat not lords.
An thou shouldst, thou 'ldst anger ladies.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
That's a lascivious apprehension.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost aman a doit.
What dost thou think 'tis worth?
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How now, philosopher!
Thou liest.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lie not.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Art not a poet?
Yes.
Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thouhast feigned him a worthy fellow.
That's not feigned; he is so.
Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thylabour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o'the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
E'en as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.
What, thyself?
Ay.
Wherefore?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That I had no angry wit to be a lord.Art not thou a merchant?
Ay, Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
If traffic do it, the gods do it.
Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]What trumpet's that?
'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,All of companionship.
Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.
You must needs dine with me: go not you henceTill I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
Most welcome, sir!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]So, so, there! Aches contract and starve your supple joints! That there should be small love 'mongst these sweet knaves, And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out Into baboon and monkey.
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feedMost hungerly on your sight.
Right welcome, sir!Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous timeIn different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
What time o' day is't, Apemantus?
Time to be honest.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]That time serves still.
The more accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
Why, Apemantus?
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean togive thee none.
Hang thyself!
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thyrequests to thy friend.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence!
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.
He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoesThe very heart of kindness.
He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold, Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him, But breeds the giver a return exceeding All use of quittance.
The noblest mind he carriesThat ever govern'd man.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?
I'll keep you company.
Most honour'd Timon, It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age, And call him to long peace. He is gone happy, and has left me rich: Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound To your free heart, I do return those talents, Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help I derived liberty.
O, by no means, Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love: I gave it freely ever; and there's none Can truly say he gives, if he receives: If our betters play at that game, we must not dare To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.
A noble spirit!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, my lords,
Ceremony was but devised at first To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes, Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown; But where there is true friendship, there needs none. Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes Than my fortunes to me.
My lord, we always have confess'd it.
Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not?
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No;You shall not make me welcome:I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Fie, thou'rt a churl; ye've got a humour there Does not become a man: 'tis much to blame. They say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est;' but yond man is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is he fit for't, indeed.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come toobserve; I give thee warning on't.
I take no heed of thee; thou'rt an Athenian,therefore welcome: I myself would have no power;prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
I scorn thy meat; 'twould choke me, for I should ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one man's blood; and all the madness is, he cheers them up too. I wonder men dare trust themselves with men: Methinks they should invite them without knives; Good for their meat, and safer for their lives. There's much example for't; the fellow that sits next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest man to kill him: 't has been proved. If I were a huge man, I should fear to drink at meals; Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes: Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides well. Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon. Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire: This and my food are equals; there's no odds: Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods. [Apemantus' Grace] Immortal gods, I crave no pelf; I pray for no man but myself: Grant I may never prove so fond, To trust man on his oath or bond; Or a harlot, for her weeping; Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping: Or a keeper with my freedom; Or my friends, if I should need 'em. Amen. So fall to't: Rich men sin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]My heart is ever at your service, my lord.
You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than adinner of friends.
So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meatlike 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!
Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that youwould once use our hearts, whereby we might expresssome part of our zeals, we should think ourselvesfor ever perfect.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves have provided that I shall have much help from you: how had you been my friends else? why have you that charitable title from thousands, did not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told more of you to myself than you can with modesty speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm you. O you gods, think I, what need we have any friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they were the most needless creatures living, should we ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble sweet instruments hung up in cases that keep their sounds to themselves. Why, I have often wished myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We are born to do benefits: and what better or properer can we can our own than the riches of our friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis, to have so many, like brothers, commanding one another's fortunes! O joy, e'en made away ere 't can be born! Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to forget their faults, I drink to you.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
Joy had the like conception in our eyesAnd at that instant like a babe sprung up.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Much!
What means that trump?
How now?
Please you, my lord, there are certainladies most desirous of admittance.
Ladies! what are their wills?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, whichbears that office, to signify their pleasures.
I pray, let them be admitted.
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all That of his bounties taste! The five best senses Acknowledge thee their patron; and come freely To gratulate thy plenteous bosom: th' ear, Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise; They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
They're welcome all; let 'em have kind admittance:Music, make their welcome!
You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way! They dance! they are mad women. Like madness is the glory of this life. As this pomp shows to a little oil and root. We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves; And spend our flatteries, to drink those men Upon whose age we void it up again, With poisonous spite and envy. Who lives that's not depraved or depraves? Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves Of their friends' gift? I should fear those that dance before me now Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done; Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies, Set a fair fashion on our entertainment, Which was not half so beautiful and kind; You have added worth unto 't and lustre, And entertain'd me with mine own device; I am to thank you for 't.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
'Faith, for the worst is filthy; and would not holdtaking, I doubt me.
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:Please you to dispose yourselves.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Most thankfully, my lord.
Flavius.
My lord?
The little casket bring me hither.
Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!There is no crossing him in 's humour;
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Else I should tell him,—well, i' faith I should, When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could. 'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind, That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Where be our men?
Here, my lord, in readiness.
Our horses!
O my friends, I have one word to say to you: look you, my good lord, I must entreat you, honour me so much As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it, Kind my lord.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I am so far already in your gifts,—
So are we all.
My lord, there are certain nobles of the senateNewly alighted, and come to visit you.
They are fairly welcome.
I beseech your honor,Vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Near! why then, another time I'll hear thee:I prithee, let's be provided to show thementertainment.
[Aside] I scarce know how.
May it please your honour, Lord Lucius,Out of his free love, hath presented to youFour milk-white horses, trapp'd in silver.
I shall accept them fairly; let the presentsBe worthily entertain'd.
How now! what news?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Please you, my lord, that honourable gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company to-morrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour two brace of greyhounds.
I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,Not without fair reward.
[Aside] What will this come to? He commands us to provide, and give great gifts, And all out of an empty coffer: Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this, To show him what a beggar his heart is, Being of no power to make his wishes good: His promises fly so beyond his state That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes For every word: he is so kind that he now Pays interest for 't; his land's put to their books. Well, would I were gently put out of office Before I were forced out! Happier is he that has no friend to feed Than such that do e'en enemies exceed. I bleed inwardly for my lord.
You do yourselvesMuch wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]O, he's the very soul of bounty!
And now I remember, my lord, you gaveGood words the other day of a bay courserI rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
You may take my word, my lord; I know, no man Can justly praise but what he does affect: I weigh my friend's affection with mine own; I'll tell you true. I'll call to you.
O, none so welcome.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]I take all and your several visitations So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give; Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends, And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades, Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich; It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast Lie in a pitch'd field.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
We are so virtuously bound—
And soAm I to you.
So infinitely endear'd—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]All to you. Lights, more lights!
The best of happiness,Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon!
Ready for his friends.
What a coil's here! Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums! I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs: Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs, Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would begood to thee.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou givest so long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and vain-glories?
Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I amsworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and comewith better music.
So: Thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not then: I'll lock thy heaven from thee. O, that men's ears should be To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
And late, five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore He owes nine thousand; besides my former sum, Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion Of raging waste? It cannot hold; it will not. If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog, And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold. If I would sell my horse, and buy twenty more Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon, Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me, straight, And able horses. No porter at his gate, But rather one that smiles and still invites All that pass by. It cannot hold: no reason Can found his state in safety. Caphis, ho! Caphis, I say!
Here, sir; what is your pleasure?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon; Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased With slight denial, nor then silenced when— 'Commend me to your master'—and the cap Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him, My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn Out of mine own; his days and times are past And my reliances on his fracted dates Have smit my credit: I love and honour him, But must not break my back to heal his finger; Immediate are my needs, and my relief Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words, But find supply immediate. Get you gone: Put on a most importunate aspect, A visage of demand; for, I do fear, When every feather sticks in his own wing, Lord Timon will be left a naked gull, Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
I go, sir.
'I go, sir!'—Take the bonds along with you,And have the dates in contempt.
I will, sir.
Go.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]No care, no stop! so senseless of expense, That he will neither know how to maintain it, Nor cease his flow of riot: takes no account How things go from him, nor resumes no care Of what is to continue: never mind Was to be so unwise, to be so kind. What shall be done? he will not hear, till feel: I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting. Fie, fie, fie, fie!
Good even, Varro: what,You come for money?
Is't not your business too?
It is: and yours too, Isidore?
It is so.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Would we were all discharged!
I fear it.
Here comes the lord.
So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Dues! Whence are you?
Of Athens here, my lord.
Go to my steward.
Please it your lordship, he hath put me off To the succession of new days this month: My master is awaked by great occasion To call upon his own, and humbly prays you That with your other noble parts you'll suit In giving him his right.
Mine honest friend,I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Nay, good my lord,—
Contain thyself, good friend.
One Varro's servant, my good lord,—
From Isidore;He humbly prays your speedy payment.
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants—
[SEQ_SPLITTER]'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.
Your steward puts me off, my lord;And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
Give me breath.I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;I'll wait upon you instantly.
Come hither: pray you, How goes the world, that I am thus encounter'd With clamourous demands of date-broke bonds, And the detention of long-since-due debts, Against my honour?
Please you, gentlemen, The time is unagreeable to this business: Your importunacy cease till after dinner, That I may make his lordship understand Wherefore you are not paid.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Do so, my friends. See them well entertain'd.
Pray, draw near.
Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:let's ha' some sport with 'em.
Hang him, he'll abuse us.
A plague upon him, dog!
[SEQ_SPLITTER]How dost, fool?
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
I speak not to thee.
No,'tis to thyself.
Come away.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]There's the fool hangs on your back already.
No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.
Where's the fool now?
He last asked the question. Poor rogues, andusurers' men! bawds between gold and want!
What are we, Apemantus?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Asses.
Why?
That you ask me what you are, and do not knowyourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.
How do you, gentlemen?
Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?
[SEQ_SPLITTER]She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickensas you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!
Good! gramercy.
Look you, here comes my mistress' page.
[To the Fool] Why, how now, captain! what do youin this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answerthee profitably.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription ofthese letters: I know not which is which.
Canst not read?
No.
There will little learning die then, that day thou art hanged. This is to Lord Timon; this to Alcibiades. Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thou't die a bawd.
Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish adog's death. Answer not; I am gone.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]E'en so thou outrunnest grace. Fool, I will go withyou to Lord Timon's.
Will you leave me there?
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
Ay; would they served us!
So would I,—as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.
[SEQ_SPLITTER]